me, | Umucets
Development Operations for every child Indo-Tibetan
: -\1
Engineer Border Police
. rer bg
ame ae Optical Engineer x <y, ¢ _ een
O a b = N a
= ws i Bi : Sd son
| O | ore os N ) ay f
i es Till i mm ( 7
D | Ee a a -
=_= | \ 4
Schae Reality Assistant Sports Equipment
a Catering Manager, Manager o
as ~ 2 r A — | Ne CN e a
E; al « ma 7 SD “i
, B \ > {
ue el = oe
| (Sh! El=\ <
SS a t We b \s
(Se Z i ; Q Ze <¥
. u —_—"
Exploring Career Paths wit)
= Cee = co
AREER CAR
GAKREEK GAKD®
A Career Guide for School Students
VOLUME-2
Commercial Driver Tour Guide ys Mediate ye
a ae wg 4
eS Wyo Sw =
& | iC b ia . =)
: wi ee sz SY Ls
0 ool@==< , \F a
2. aro
ee ; Oe ow
Criminologist : Botanist Are Felice Roe oe alist
\ “~ f
rs a Ss ; ka!
ve Fis 6. i mg
wx ip a
-<d Ly =k | ; weale : } y
A 7, ee La Vii ie

:

EXPLORING CARRER PATHS
WITH
CAREER CARDS
(A CAREER GUIDE FOR SCHOOL STUDENTS)

it ale

“= —-
| No
WX:

23111-Exp.torinc CaREER PaTHS WITH CAREER CARDS
(A Career Guide For School Students) Volume 2 ISBN 978-93-5729-442-3
First Edition ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Q No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system
. . or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,
April 2025 Chaitra 1947 photocopying, recording or otherwise without the prior permission of the
publisher.

Q This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way of trade, be
lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed of without the publisher’s consent,
in any form of binding or cover other than that in which it is published.

Q The correct price of this publication is the price printed on this page, Any revised
price indicated by a rubber stamp or by a sticker or by any other means is
incorrect and should be unacceptable.

OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION
DIVISION, NCERT
NCERT Campus
PD 3T BS Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016 Phone : 011-26562708
© National Council of Educational 108, 100 Feet Road
ee Hosdakere Halli Extension
Research and Training, 2025 Banashankari Ill Stage
Bangaluru 560 085 Phone : 080-26725740
Navjivan Trust Building
P.O.Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 Phone : 079-27541446
CWC Campus
Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop
Panihati
= 775.00 Kolkata 700 114 Phone : 033-25530454
CWC Complex
Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 Phone : 0361-2674869
Publication Team
Head, Publication : M. V. Srinivasan
Division
Chief Editor : Binan Sutar
Chief Production : Jahan Lal
Officer (In charge)
Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT ; ; ;
watermark Chief Business : Amitabh Kumar
gs a. Manager
Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of Assistant Production : Prakash Veer
Educational Research and Training, Officer Singh
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110 016
and printed at D.P. Printing & Binding,
B-149, Okhla-I, A-1, New Delhi—1 10020

wie Wet int 7% Rien At
uerig Quie cas a UR GR
Dharmendra Pradhan arya Heke Minister of Education
Government of India
.
MESSAGE
The NEP 2020 mandates the establishment of robust guidance
and counselling mechanisms in every school to assist the students and
the parents. These counselling cells are tasked with implementing a
system to address students’ aspirations and help them pursue their
choices and passion.
The Ministry of Education, Government of India has collaborated
with United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), New Delhi to come out
with a comprehensive "Career Guidance Book", which contains 500
career cards. It is a testament to our commitment to provide every
student with the tools and knowledge necessary to make informed
decisions about their future career. Providing a snapshot of different
professions, outlining key responsibilities, required qualifications, and
potential career trajectories, these career cards are designed to be
user-friendly, making career exploration an engaging and informative
experience for our students.
lam happy that the "Career Guidance Book", featuring career
cards compiled into two volumes, is being launched on the occasion
of the 4th Anniversary of National Education Policy 2020.
| invite all our students to benefit from the career guide and
utilize the information effectively in their pursuit of a successful career.
(Dharmendra Pradhan)
wan) fQre, ares f2ret
MOE - Room No. 301, 'C’ Wing, 3” Floor, Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi-110 001, Phone : 91-11-23782387, Fax: 91-11-23382365
E-mail : minister.sm@gov.in


JAYANT CHAUDHARY bn wea Fal (a TAR) va

a Paren wo aA

7 ARG WHR
Minister of State (Independent Charge) for
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship

and Minister of State for Education
Government Of India
? 25 JUL 2024
/
MESSAGE

It gives me immense pleasure to know that the PSS Central Institute of
Vocational Education (PSSCIVE) in collaboration with the United Nations
Children’s Fund (UNICEF), India has developed two volumes of the
comprehensive “Career Guidance Book”.

The two volumes, containing 500 career cards, are designed to serve as an
invaluable resource for students across the country. Each card provides detailed
insights into a diverse array of career options, catering to the varied interests and
aspirations of our young learners. I am confident that the “Career Guidance Book”
will be a source of inspiration and a guiding light for students as they navigate
their educational and professional journeys.

This initiative underscores our commitment to empowering students with
the knowledge and skills and to provide guidance necessary to make informed
decisions about their futures.

I extend my heartfelt gratitude to all the contributors who have worked
tirelessly to make this vision a reality. Together, let us continue to strive for
excellence in education and create opportunities for every child to realize their full
potential.

rau Ar
Ie)
(Jayant Chaudhary)
Office: Room No. 104-A, 'C’ Wing, Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi-110 001
Phone : +91-11-23384327, 23381302, E-mail: mosedu-jc@gov.in


o_ Mpeg
WA DAR, wwe IN AG RPTR
urea PSN Pere wae
(ae weet Rien ak wear feart
Sanjay Kumar, As were sat Government of India
Secretary Ministry of Education
Department of School Education & Literacy
—<
ye
=
i f
MESSAGE
I am pleased that a comprehensive Career Guidance Book has been developed by PSS Central
Institute of Vocational Education (PSSCIVE) in collaboration with United Nations Children's
Fund (UNICEF) India. In today's dynamic job market, our young minds must be well-prepared
to navigate its complexities. This guide offers invaluable insights into various career options,
skill requirements, and pathways to success, making it a vital resource for our students.
A standout feature of this Career Guidance Book is the inclusion of 500 Career Cards. These
cards outline key responsibilities, required qualifications, and potential career trajectories in a
user-friendly format, ensuring that career exploration is both engaging and informative. | am
confident that both student and teacher community of our country will utilize these cards so
that our next generation of thinkers, creators and problem-solvers is ready. This Book will be
of great value to the block level counsellors who will guide our students.
| extend my gratitude to the team at the PSSCIVE and UNICEF who contributed to the creation
of the Career Cards.
(Sanjay Kumar)
124 “Or fet, wrest waa, ag feeeit—110001
124 'C' Wing, Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi-110001
Telephone: +91-11-23382587, +91-11-23381104 Fax : +91-11-23387589
E-mail: secy.sel@nic.in


wrest SAB STTRETT aay - NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL
sie wfdtaror uaa RESEARCH AND TRAINING

St arfaa art, as feet 110016 @ Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110016

WH: +91-11-26519154, 26964712 Phone: +91-11-26519154, 26964712

aT: 491-11-26519159 uratdaree Fax: +91-11-26519159
$-Adi: director.ncert@nic.in —— Email: director.ncert@nic.in

mither fear sare aH

Pree

Professor Dinesh Prasad Saklani

Director

MESSAGE FROM THE DIRECTOR, NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL
RESEARCH AND TRAINING
: if
ax
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT), was established to
provide academic support to improve the quality of school education in India. It has been
imparting training to teacher educators, school administrators, in-service school teachers, as
well as guidance personnel through its Diploma courses for many years. Under the aegis of
the Ministry of Education (MoE), Government of India, we have also developed Tamanna -
an Aptitude Test for Senior School Students to enable stakeholders to know the aptitude of
the students of Grades 9 and 10. Students in the secondary stage (Grades 11 & 12) of
schooling have to take many important decisions regarding careers such as exploring courses
of study, preparing for competitive examinations and deciding the career pathways based on
their interests’ aptitudes and aspirations. Career guidance at this stage plays a very crucial
role in the life of the secondary students as they can make an informed choice regarding their
career, if they are well informed.
I am sure that this Career Guide book containing 500 Career Cards, which is being launched
on the 4th anniversary of NEP 2020, by the Department of School Education and Literacy,
Ministry of Education, Government of India in collaboration with the United Nations
Children's Fund (UNICEF) of India will set a milestone in the history of career guidance and
counselling. I appeal to Counsellors, Teachers, and Educators to utilise the Career Guide book
and help students to understand the relevance of their studies for future careers. ] am sure
that the students will be able to gain insight into various career paths, understand the steps
required to achieve their goals and make informed decisions about their education and career
choices.
Director, NCERT


MESSAGE FROM REPRESENTATIVE UNICEF, INDIA
f , —~
iA! =
Fi .
Choosing a career path is a big step for anyone. Imagine how daunting it can be for
an adolescent. Yet, many secondary students often miss out on essential guidance for
their educational and professional development. This information is crucial to help them
move smoothly from secondary school to higher education and into decent work. Career
guidance empowers students to discover their interests, strengths, and passions, paving
the way to their dream careers.
UNICEF’s initiative to establish 500 career pathways across the country is designed to
unlock students’ potential. Following the Ministry of Education’s guidance, UNICEF India
has customized career cards into two volumes. These have been compiled into books
in collaboration with PSSCIVE - Bhopal. These resources will be invaluable in helping
students make informed decisions about their futures.
The Ministry of Education’s push to integrate career guidance and mentoring at secondary
and higher secondary levels will further support students in navigating their future paths.
Additionally, the Ministry’s strategic move to deploy academic resource persons for career
counseling at the block level is truly commendable. This initiative aligns perfectly with
the goal of building a comprehensive support system that helps students choose their
career paths wisely.
UNICEF is delighted to support the Ministry of Education in this crucial endeavor, acting
as a guiding light for diverse professional trajectories and advocating for the right fit for
each student. We are eager to continue our partnership with the Ministry to ensure the
success and impact of this career guidance program.
Coptin Millay
Ms. Cynthia McCaffrey
Representative
UNICEF India Country Office


INTRODUCTION
Education aims to foster the overall development of students in all aspects - educational,
vocational, personal, social, moral, and physical - to help them become productive and
valuable citizens. Guidance and counselling, aligning with educational goals, strive to
maximize children’s personal development across all areas of life. By addressing the
needs of all students, guidance and counselling ensure that education is a meaningful
and fulfilling experience. These services not only assist students in understanding
themselves and others but also support them in handling personal, social, academic, and
career-related concerns. They help develop effective study habits, motivation, identify
learning or subject-related issues, demonstrate the relevance of school years for the
future, and build skills, attitudes, and interests essential for career choices.
The National Education Policy (NEP) 2020, introduced in India, underscores the
significance of counselling in schools as a key component of the educational framework.
It highlights the necessity of early exposure to various career options for students. A
career is an individual’s journey of lifelong learning, working, extensive training, and
acquiring new skills. Career counselling in schools is designed to begin at an early age,
aiding students in exploring their interests, aptitudes, and aspirations, and providing
information about different career fields and opportunities. The policy advocates a holistic
approach to career guidance, considering the individual needs, interests, and strengths
of each student. Career counselling should be personalized, helping students make
informed decisions about their future. NEP 2020 also promotes the use of technology
and online resources to enhance career counselling services. Digital platforms, career
assessment tools, and online databases offer students up-to-date information on career
options, college admissions, scholarships, and other relevant resources.
According to the National Curriculum Framework for School Education (NCF-SE) 2023,
the Secondary Stage should emphasize practical application. Students need to develop
a deep understanding of the vocation’s role in the world. Guidance and Counselling in
schools help students recognize and understand their abilities, improve coping skills,
enhance decision-making, foster better relationships, and become self-directed in
adapting to life’s challenges.
ABouT CAREER CARDS
Career cards included in this document provide a comprehensive overview of various
job titles, highlighting essential personality traits and potential scholarships available,
including details on loan provisions and expected income. They also outline the
educational pathways necessary for each career. The career cards also describe typical
work environments and expected job growth in the sector or industry. Additionally, they
offer information on where to study and include examples or case studies of successful
people in the field, offering a holistic view of each career option.
UTILISING CAREER CARDS
Career cards can be a powerful tool for teachers, counsellors and students to explore and
understand various career options. Here are some guidelines for effective use:
For Teachers/Counsellors
Understand each career card’s content, including job descriptions, required skills,
education pathways, and potential career growth.

e Define the objectives of using career cards, such as career exploration, skill

identification, or aligning interests with potential careers.
e Explain the purpose of career cards to students and how they can be used to
explore various career options.

e Incorporate career cards into interactive activities like group discussions,
role-playing, or career day events.

e Create activities where students draw a card, research the career, and present
their findings to the class.

e Encourage students to reflect on what they learned about careers and their interests
and skills.

Activities with Career Cards

e Career Mapping: Students create a “career map” showing different pathways to
achieve their career goals, starting from their current grade level.

e Role Plays: Students role-play a day in the life of a profession assigned to them
from the career cards, helping them understand the career’s responsibilities and
challenges.

e Career Fair: Organize a career fair where students present the careers they have
researched, using posters, presentations, or interactive displays.

e Peer Discussions: Arrange group discussions for students to share their learnings
about different careers and discuss similarities and differences.

e Skills and Interests Matching: Have students match their skills and interests
with the careers on the cards.

e Professional Talks: Invite professionals from the careers represented on the cards
to speak with students.

e Additional Resources: Offer further resources for students to explore careers of
interest, such as websites, books, or community programs.

For Students

e Use the information from the career cards to set short-term and long-term
educational and career goals. Look into job descriptions, required education,
typical day-to-day responsibilities, and long-term career prospects.

e Be active in discussions and activities involving the career cards.

e Inquire about aspects of the careers that interest you or seem unclear.

e Cross-reference information from the career cards with other reliable sources to
get a comprehensive understanding.

e Think about which careers resonate with your interests, skills, and values.

e Recognize the skills required for careers that interest you and plan how to develop
those skills through education or extracurricular activities.

e Do not hesitate to ask teachers, counsellors, or mentors for advice on how to
pursue your career interests.

xiv

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT) gratefully
acknowledges the valuable guidance, support, and contributions received from various
individuals and institutions in the development and publication of 500 Career Cards
under the title Exploring Career Paths with Career Cards: A Career Guide for School
Students.
We extend our sincere gratitude to the Department of School Education, Ministry of
Education, Government of India for the continuous encouragement and support in this
initiative.
We extend our gratitude to Prachi Pandey, Joint Secretary, Department of School Education
and Literacy, Ministry of Education, Government of India, for her visionary leadership
and motivation throughout the development of this resource.
We are thankful to Sameer Daniel, Senior Consultant (Vocational Education), Department
of School Education and Literacy, for his unwavering support, and coordination during
the preparation of this career guide.
We appreciate the academic leadership and institutional support provided by Deepak
Paliwal, Joint Director, and Vinay Swarup Mehrotra, Professor and Head, Curriculum
Development and Evaluation Centre, PSS Central Institute of Vocational Education
(PSSCIVE), NCERT, Bhopal.
We also acknowledge with gratitude the partnership and contributions of the UNICEF
India team. Our heartfelt thanks to Sayem Mehmood, Education Specialist (EdTech);
Pramila Manoharan, Education Specialist; Deepti Madhura, Education Consultant, and
Hrishikesh Nagoorkar, Education Consultant (EdTech), for their valuable inputs, expertise,
and collaboration in shaping this career guide.
The contributions of Soumma Chandra, Editor (Contractual), C Thanglenmang Doungel,
Mobbata Ram, Proof Readers (Contractual) for editing this publication and Sanju Sharma,
Mohan Singh DTP Operators (Contractual), Surender Kumar, In-charge, DTP Cell for
formatting and giving this career guide its final shape are acknowledged.
The collective efforts have significantly enriched the quality and relevance of the 500
Career Cards, which aim to empower students, educators, and stakeholders with timely,
accessible, and engaging career information.

Be THE CONSTITUTION OF | °°
\ A. INDIA ~<
BY SN PREAMBLE k a can
| WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having |.
»<3| solemnly resolved to constitute India intoa }- SS
) | [SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR | ».._
Oe TNS
’¢, | DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC] and to secure |: (a;
7. | to allits citizens: WR
b <<.) JUSTICE, social, economic and | ’ .
Ay ah political; NK
AON LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief, |‘
Dw faith and worship; Viva
aN Weg ;
Ps EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; | ~ >
. Ay and to promote among them all ING
we FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of |...
Sas the individual and the ‘[unity and}
‘ San integrity of the Nation]; . “3 \
Se IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY |... 5
“4. | this twenty-sixth day of November, 1949do |.
-<) | HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO |.» \
“7 | OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION. Wis
: Nz 1. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, Sec.2, \GY z
Ge for "Sovereign Democratic Republic" (w.e.f. 3.1.1977) @.
\ yr 2. Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, Sec.2, |}. “J *
| for "Unity of the Nation" (w.e.f. 3.1.1977) ws IRS
SDD AL, BPN ERO GRE:
& SS : Qe Se es & ~ x % WE YS Ve See OR ON :
Xvi

CONTENTS
Introduction xiit
About Career Cards xiit
Utilising Career Cards xiit
Engineering
Aeronautical Engineer 449
Automobile Engineer 451
Bioinformatics Engineering 453
Biomedical Engineer 455
Biotechnology Engineer 457
Broadcast Engineer 459
CAD Designer for Carpets 461
CAD Jewellery Designer 463
Ceramic Technologist/Engineer 465
Chemical Engineer 467
Civil Engineer/Structural Engineer 469
Corrosion Engineer 471
Design Engineer 473
Development Operations Engineer 475
Electrical and Electronics Engineer 477
Electronics Designer /VLSI/Embedded System Designer 479
Electronics and Communication Engineer 481
Environmental Engineer 483
Fire and Safety Engineer 485
Food Engineer 487
Footwear Designer 489
Forensic Engineer 491
Geo-informatics Engineer 493
Graphics Designer 495
Industrial Designer 497
Industrial Engineer 499
Instrumentation Engineer 501
Manufacturing Engineer 503
Marine Engineer 505
Mechanical Engineer 507
Metallurgy Engineer 509
Mining Engineer 511
Nanotechnology/ Nanoscience Engineer 513
Optical Engineer 515
Petroleum Engineer 517
Pharmaceutical Engineer 519

Printing Engineer/Technologist 521
Process Engineer 523
Product Designer 525
Quality Assurance Engineer 527
Railway Engineer 529
Robotics Engineer 531
Sales Engineer 533
Smart Manufacturing and Automation Engineering 535
Sound Engineer 537
Textile Engineer 539
Tool Engineer 541
Water Resource Engineer 543
Government Services
Agniveer 547
Border Security Force 549
CISF Officer 551
Coast Guard 553
CRPF Officer 555
Customs Officer 557
FSSAI Officer 559
Gramin Dak Sevak 561
Indian Administrative Service 563
Indian Air Force Officer 565
Indian Army Officer 567
Indian Foreign Service 569
Indian Forest Service 571
Indian Home Guard 573
Indian Navy Officer 575
Indian Police Service 577
Indian Railway Accounts Service 579
Indian Railway Personnel Service 581
Indian Railway Service of Electrical Engineers 583
Indian Railway Service of Engineers 585
Indian Railway Service of Mechanical Engineers 587
Indian Railway Service of Signal Engineers 589
Indian Railway Stores Service 591
Indian Railways Traffic Service 593
Indian Revenue Service 595
Inspector of Income Tax 597
ITBP Officer 599
Loco Pilot 601
Merchant Navy 603
xviii

Police Constable 605
Railway Protection Force 607
Sashastra Seema Bal Officer 609
Sub-inspector of Police 611
Information Technology
Artificial Intelligence Engineer 615
Augmented Reality Engineer 617
Big Data Analyst 619
Blockchain Developer 621
Cloud Engineer 623
Computer Hardware Engineer 625
Computer Network Architect 627
Computer Science Engineer 629
Computer Scientist 631
Cyber Security Specialist 633
Data Scientist 635
Database Administrator 637
Full Stack Developer 639
Game Designer and Developer 641
Help Desk Analyst 643
Information Technology Engineer 645
Internet of Things Solutions Architect 647
Network Administrator 649
Programmer/Coder/Software Engineer 651
SEO Manager 653
Software Application Packager 655
Systems Analyst 657
User Experience Designer 659
Virtual Reality Engineer 661
Web Analyst 663
Web Designer 665
Management
Assistant Catering Manager 669
BPO Executive 671
Event Manager 673
Human Resource Manager 675
Inventory Manager 677
Knowledge Process Outsourcing Executive 679
Purchasing and Materials Manager 681
Retail Manager 683
Rural Development Specialist / Manager 685
xix

Sales and Marketing Manager 687
Sports Agent/Manager 689
Sports Equipment Manager 691
Operations, Logistics, and Hospitality
Air Hostess/Purser 695
Air Traffic Controller 697
Aircraft Pilot 699
Airline Cargo Assistant 701
Airline Customer Service Executive 703
Airline Ground Support Equipment Operator 705
Auctioneer 707
Bartender/Mixologist 709
Bulldozer Operator 711
Cold Chain Process Management Specialist 713
Commercial Driver 715
Conveyor Operation and Maintenance Technician 717
Distribution Manager 719
Food and Beverage Manager 721
Front Office Associate 723
Logistics Analyst 725
Logistics Manager 727
Multi-tasking Staff 729
Nature Guide 731
Office Administrator 733
Operations Manager 735
Package Dyeing Machine Operator 737
Port Operations Manager 739
Secretary /Personal Assistant 741
Sommelier 743
Supply Chain Manager 745
Tour Guide 747
Tour Operator 749
Transportation Manager 751
Travel Consultant 793
Urban Planner 7595
Public Policy, Law, and Safety
Arbitrator 759
Corporate Legal Advisor/Compliance Officer 761
Detective 763
Firefighter 765
Human Rights Lawyer 767
XX

International Relations Specialist 769
Judge 771
Lawyer /Law Officer/Advocate 773
Medico Legal Advisor 775
Patent Lawyer 777
Psephologist 779
Public Policy Advisor 781
Social Worker 783
Sports Lawyer 785
Unarmed Security Guard 787
Research and Development
Anthropologist 791
Archaeologist 793
Astrophysicist 795
Botanist 797
Child Development Specialist 799
Criminologist 801
Curator 803
Cytologist/Cytotechnologist 805
Data Collector or Field Survey Enumerator 807
Demographer 809
Ecologist 811
Economist 813
Engineering Physicist 815
English Literature Scholar 817
Epigraphist 819
Forensic Scientist 821
Genetic Engineer 823
Geographer 825
Geologist 827
Historian 829
Mathematician 831
Meteorologist 833
Museologist 835
Nanoscientist 837
Paleontologist 839
Physicist 841
Political Scientist 843
Scientific Assistant 845
Seismologist 847
Sociologist 849
Space Scientist 851
xxi

Statistician 853
Toxicologist 855
Virologist 857
Zoologist 859
Technical and Skill Trades
Appliqué Artisan 863
Assistant Beauty Therapist 865
Assistant Carpenter (Wooden Furniture) 867
Assistant False Ceiling and Drywall Installer 869
Assistant Fitter (Levelling, Alignment and Balancing) 871
Assistant Hair Stylist 873
Assistant Surveyor 875
Auto Service Technician 877
Auto/E-Rickshaw Driver and Technician 879
Automotive Electrician 881
Bamboo Mat Weaver 883
Bamboo Utility Product Tailor 885
Cake Artist 887
Camp Helper 889
CCTV Installation Technician 891
Chef 893
Child Caretaker (Non-clinical) 895
Chocolatier 897
CNC Operator (Turning) 899
Coffee Taster/Barista/Q Grader 901
Construction-Painter and Decorator 903
Crochet Lace Maker — Furnishings 905
Doors and Windows Fixer 907
Draughtsman 909
DTH Set Top Box Installation and Service Technician 911
Electric Vehicle Assembly Technician 913
Electrician (General) 915
E-waste Collector 917
Field Technician- Other Home Appliances 919
Fitter (Electrical and Electronic Assembly) 921
Fitter (Fabrication) 923
Fitter (Mechanical Assembly) 925
Fitter (Processing) 927
Food and Beverage Service Steward 929
General Housekeeper 931
Helper (Carpenter) 933
Helper-Fabrication 935
xxii

Home Delivery Boy 937
Home Cook 939
Housekeeping Attendant (Manual Cleaning) 941
Industrial Production Worker (Food Processing) 943
Installer - Frameless Glass Doors/ Windows 945
Jute Handloom Weaver 947
Kitchen Steward 949
Lapidarist 951
Leather Technologist 953
Light Motor Vehicle Driver 955
Mason (General) 957
Mason (Stone) 959
Mason (Tiling) 961
Master Hand Embroiderer (Hand Crafted Textiles) 963
Mechanical Fitter 965
Multi Skill Technician (Electrical) 967
Multi Skill Technician (Food Processing) 969
Oil Technologist 971
Operator-Boring Machine 973
Pastry Chef 975
Plumber 977
Refrigeration Technician 979
Retail Cashier 981
Retail Store Operations Assistant 983
Room Attendant 985
Rubber Technologist 987
Self-employed E-tailer 989
Sewing Machine Operator 991
Showroom Hostess/Host 993
Smartphone Repair Technician 995
Solar and LED Technician 997
Spa Therapist 999
Stone Cutter (Cutting Machine Operator) — Stone Craft 1001
Store Keeper (Construction) 1003
Stringing/ Beading Artisan (Fashion Jewellery) 1005
Sugar Technologist 1007
Tea Taster 1009
Tour Operator 1011
Tower Technician 1013
Trainee Chef/Assistant Cook 1015
Waste Collector 1017
Wood Polisher 1019
xxiiiAutomobile Engineering deals with the designing, developing, manufacturing, testing, repairing and servicing
automobiles such as cars, trucks, motorcycles, scooters etc and the related sub engineering systems. Automobile
Engineering uses the features of different elements of engineering such as mechanical, electrical, electronic, software
and safety engineering. It forms a subset of the larger automotive engineering.
A
wD =a
_
mm bo ;
o==
¢ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship - This
scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first year
of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward students
who have a strong aptitude for scientific research.”
¢ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this © vevessstntsoetsssscusssoesinsnrsiassenetaseressnarensnansesa
scheme.” 1. Complete 10+2 in Science stream with Physics,
¢ The All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) Chemistry and Maths.
offers various scholarship schemes for students pursuing — 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.E./B.Tech.) in
technical education. These include the Pragati Scholarship . : :
for girl students and the Saksham Scholarship for Automobile Engineering
differently-abled students. While not specific to OR
automobile engineering, eligible students in this field can Complete B.E./B.Tech in Automobile Engineering,
apply for these scholarships. followed by Master's degree in Automobile
e Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers Engineering or Automotive Engineering
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students OR
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The . . . . .
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical Complete Diploma in Automobile Engineering .
disabilities, women and students from North East and J&K.” For admissions to the UG course, you must qualify
¢ Central Sector Scheme of Scholarships for College and entrance examinations that are conducted on
University Students - This scholarship is awarded to the national/state/university level such as JEE Main, JEE
meritorious students from economically weaker sections. Advanced BITSAT, MHT CET, etc.
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Central Government schemes offered by different
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.
¢ Scholarships are also available in institutes based on
merit.”
*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for Lo
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Ministry of
Education and Indian Banks Association (IBA). Students
can view, apply and track the education loan
applications on the website.
+ Some States have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. : :
¢ All banks give education loans. oe
tee eee eee ee ASL

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7"
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Automobile/Automotive Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Government Engineering College Barton Hill, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala
2. Lalabhai Dalpatbhai College of Engineering, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
3. Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai, Maharastra
4. Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Madras Institute of Technology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
6. National Institute of Technology, Patna, Bihar
7. Rajiv Gandhi Proudyogiki Vishwavidyalaya (R.G.V.P.), Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh
8. Government College of Engineering and Research, Pune, Maharastra
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu
2. SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Kattankulathur, Tamil Nadu
3. Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, Maharastra
4. PSG Tech Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
5. Presidency University, Bangalore, Karnataka EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
6. Lovely Professional University (LPU), Phagwara, Punjab
7. PGP Polytechnic College, Namakkal, Tamil Nadu
8. KE Society's Rajarambapu Institute of Technology,
Uran Islampur, Maharastra
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https;,//www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
452

Bioinformatics combines Computer Science, Big Data and Life Science to provide solutions to experts working with
huge volumes of genetic information. It focuses on molecules like DNA. These Engineers have an expertise in Genetics,
Laboratory techniques, and Research protocols, and use Bioinformatics methodology to analyse Biological data.
N -@g
\Y
_*<
LJ | t \
¢ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the
first year of their engineering undergraduate course.
Eligibility includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
e Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the = EDUCATIO
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course =O EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics
under this scheme. . . ‘
_ |. ; : Chemistry and Biology).
e Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers 2. Complete Bachelor's (B.Tech/B.E./B.Sc) in
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. . :
; Bioinformatics
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate OR
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students , ,
with physical disabilities, women and students from Complete Bachelor s followed by a Master's
North East and J&K." (M.Tech/M.E./M.Sc) in the same discipline
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit OR . Doe .
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are Complete Diploma in Bioinformatics.
Central Government schemes offered by different _— ;
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State For admissions, you must qualify entrance
Schemes.” examination conducted at national level (JEE Main,
+ Scholarships are also available in institutes based on JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
merit.” EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
(Evel Sl SMin7 Cx ines seins Tran] 9 Vey ELEN tM HO Ua) Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of le:
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
+ Some States have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
« All banks give education loans. -
eee ee ee ee ew wt 453

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You can work in the Academic
sector with Researchers and Universities as well as
with Pharmaceutical companies.” EXPECTED GROWTH PATH Ae
Bioinformatics Research Trainee —
Work Environment: Companies usually work for 5 Bioinformatics Engineer —> Bioinformatics
to 6 days a week and 8 to 9 hours everyday. This : . :
. Research Lead — Senior Bioinformatics
may vary from company to company. Shift system } -_
might be applicable. Engineer — Head of Bioinformatics
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Bioinformatics.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Buxi Jagabandhu Bidyadhar Autonomous College, Bhubaneshwar, Odisha
2. Government Holkar Science College, Indore, Madhya Pradesh
3. Post Graduate Government College for Girls Sector 42, Chandigarh
A. Jamal Mohamed College, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu
5. Agricultural College and Research Institute, Madurai, Tamil Nadu
6. Madras Veterinary College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
7. Government Kamla Raja Girls Post Graduate College, Gwalior, Madhra Pradesh
8. Andhra University College of Engineering, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying ) Xx :
1. Dr DY Patil Arts Commerce and Science College, Pune, Maharashtra ~ UY
2. Sri Krishna Arts and Science College, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
3. St Xaviers College, Mumbai, Maharashtra
4. Anwarul Uloom College, Hyderabad, Telangana
5. Stella Maris College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu =<
6. St Aloysius College Autonomous, Mangaluru, Karnataka x ~~
7. UC College Aluva - Union Christian College, Kelara Pus s. >
8. Guru Nanak Khalsa College of Arts Science and Commerce, Mumbai, Maharashtra >
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - < i >
https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html > J 1
é 1
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE “CC P
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
454

A Biomedical Engineer is a specialist who innovates and designs techonological solutions for the medical industry.
They are responsible for designing and creating artificial organs, devices, software and other equipments used in
healthcare. They work to improve the quality and effectiveness of patient care, and improve the quality of life as well
as the functioning of the medical industry.
ry ray Oo
| ogy vd
q
si
Ss) ps F, ‘
SS | 2 cl Lp
ob
7 4
e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship - s -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the
first year of their engineering undergraduate course. -
Eligibility includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.

« Central Sector Scheme of Scholarship for College and
University Students Offered by the Department of
Higher Education, this scholarship supports
undergraduate students with strong academic records
and financial need. Eligible students receive financial
assistance to cover tuition and other expenses.

e Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000 =
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY _

Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course

fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream.

under this scheme. * 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Tech./BE/B.Sc.)
¢ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers in Biomedical Engineering

300 scholarships every year to eligible students. OR

Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate Complete Bachelor's degree and follow it up with

course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students Master's (M.Tech.) in Biomedical Engineering.

with physical disabilities, women and students from

North East and J&K." wo . .

+ National Scholarship Portal - Visit For admissions, you must qualify JEE Main, and
www-.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are follow It up with JEE Advanced is needed for
Central Government schemes offered by different admissions to IITs. Other entrance exams can be
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State taken such as GATE/BITSAT etc.

Schemes.”

« Scholarships are also available in institutes based on Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
merit.”

*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)

« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for Ga
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website. _

+ Some states have student credit cards with low interest ee
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. se

- All banks give education loans. eee

455

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH yw”
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering. A
This list of institutes is indicative only «
e
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES [uuu]
1. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra : .
2. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
3. Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi
4. Bundelkhand University, Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh
5. College of Engineering, Pune, Maharashtra
6. National Institute of Technology, Raipur, Chhattisgarh
7. Indian Institute of Engineering, Science and Technology, Shibpur,
West Bengal
8. Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, Telangana
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka
2. Integral University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh aoe
3. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu
4. Sathyabama Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai , Tamil Nadu
5. Karunya Institute of Technology and Sciences, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
6. Amity University, Gurugram, Uttar Pradesh
7. SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Kallankuthar, Tamil Nadu
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD CG
456

Biotechnology Engineers use Biology, Chemistry, Physics, Engineering and Information Technology to
develop tools and products to improve human life. They help in fighting against diseases, protecting the
environment and utilizing cleaner energy among others.
tr
nh
/ NX
\
¢ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the
first year of their engineering undergraduate course.
Eligibility includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
¢ DBT Biotechnology Eligibility Test (BET) Offered by the
Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Government of
India, this test identifies candidates for the award of
Junior Research Fellowships (JRF) in biotechnology and [=! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
life sciences. Successful candidates receive a monthly © vricicesesesssessssecsessseseerseescseeesecseesssesesessseeseess
stipend of %25,000 plus House Rent Allowance (HRA) as 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream.
per norms, with an annual contingency grant of 730,000. 2c | ' . ope
The fellowship tenure is up to five years, subject to - Complete Bachelor's degree in Biotechnology
P ten 2 Yeens, SUs]|
satisfactory performance. OR a
+ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About Complete Bachelor's degree in Biotechnology and
20,000 such engineering scholarships are awarded by follow it up with Master's in the same or allied field
the Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course OR
fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions Complete Bachelor's degree in Biotechnology,
under this scheme. * followed by an online course related to the field.
e Indian Oil Educational Scholarship - The |OC Ltd
offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible students. F oe .
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate or admissions, you must qualify entrance
g ae .
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students examination conducted at national level (JEE
with physical disabilities, women and students from Main, JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
North East and J&K* EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
¢ The National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there are Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
central government schemes offered by different
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes”
« Scholarships are made available by institutes themselves
based on merit”
“(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and _
track the education loan applications on the website. ee
+ Some states have student credit cards with low interest o
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. ve
« All banks give education loans. Peet
457

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
The course is offered by the Department of Biotechnology = ry
This list of institutes is indicative only £ i =
= | a.i9
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES ! Ss S
1. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu r) / ( y i |
2. Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi no oH |
3. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh V f _ i Eg
A. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, Maharashtra \ See Tria / Ves 1
5. Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, Uttarakhand
6. Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka \
7. Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, Telangana WK ,
8. Indian Institute of Technology, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh _ a>
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala, Punjab
2. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka
3. RV College of Engineering, Bangalore, Karnataka
4. Haldia Institute of Technology, West Bengal
5. SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Kallankuthar, Tamil Nadu
6. Birla Institute of Technology, Pilani, Rajasthan
7. \ellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu
8. Christ University, Bangalore, Karnataka
Information on institute rankings is available at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD MJ
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
458

A Broadcast Engineer is essentially in charge of setting up, supervising, maintaining and repairing all the technical,
sound, video and audio equipment in television, radio and studio broadcasts. Broadcast media technology includes
different techniques of communication that involve sending data over large distances using electronic and electro-
magnetic methods.
© e
\s =
x Vom
& LA
— |
ie soil
Lg oe
| _f i mt
e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship - This -
scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first ;
year of their engineering undergraduate course.
Eligibility includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
¢ AICTE Pragati Scholarship for Girls: This scholarship,
provided by the All India Council for Technical Education
(AICTE), aims to support girls pursuing technical
education, including engineering disciplines.
¢ AICTE Saksham Scholarship Scheme: Designed for —
differently-abled students pursuing technical education, ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
this AICTE scholarship offers ¥30,000 towards tuition fees
and a contingency allowance of 2,000 per month for 1. Complete 10 +2 in the Science stream (Physics,
10 months. Chemistry, Maths).
¢ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000 2. Complete a Bachelor's (B.Sc/B.Tech) in
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the Electrical Engineering/Telecommunication
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course Engineering/Information Technol A
fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions g g on leconology ere.
under this scheme. * OR
e Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students Master's degree in the same or related field.
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical For admissions, you must qualify entrance
disabilities, women and students from North East and examination conducted at national level (JEE Main,
se P JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
* National Scholarship Portal - Visit EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.)
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are . ' -
Central Government schemes offered by different : :
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
+ Scholarships are also available in institutes based on
merit.”
*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is o portal for Gq
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
« Some States have student credit cards with low interest ee
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. e-
« All banks give education loans. _—
ee 7 To

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH sy”
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY? ~
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering. y
This list of institutes is indicative only P Ni
i
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES : Ga.
1. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu a ANY
2. Periyar University, Salem, Tamil Nadu A
3. Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Rajasthan
4. Indian Institutes of Information Technology,
Bhubaneswar, Odisha = 2
5. Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Uttarakhand
6. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra
7. Aryabhatta Knowledge University, Patna, Bihar
8. Assam Science and Technology, Guwahati, Assam
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. NorthCap University, Gurgaon, Haryana
2. Chandigarh University,Chandigarh
3. Presidency University, Bangaluru, Karnataka
4. Chitkara University, Baddi, Himachal Pradesh
5. Lingaya's Vidyyapeeth, Faridabad, Haryana
6. Birla Institute of Technology And Science, Pilani, Rajasthan
7. Zee Institute of Media Arts, Mumbai, Maharashtra
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD KJ
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
460

‘
a
— ee. |
a *> =
7")
wD
* You have keen interest in art and drawing
« You have an eye for details ’ |
* You are good at working independently ;
The approx. course fee ranges between
Bachelor's Degree : INR 20,000 -
~1,00,000* per year.
*These figures are estimated numbers and will vary
form Institute to Institute.

1. Secondary Education (9-12): Focus on
foundational design principles and basic CAD
skills through elective courses or vocational
programs.

2. Diploma: Enroll in a CAD-focused diploma
program specializing in textile and carpet
design.

3. Undergraduate/Postgraduate: Pursue
degrees in design, textile technology, or
related fields with advanced CAD training.

4. Doctoral Studies/Short-term Courses:
Undertake research or short-term certification
courses in CAD for carpet design to refine
expertise.

Please check the duration of the course during enrolment

“These figures are taken from NCS and are indicative

and subject to change .
The approx. salary of a CAD designer ranges
between INR 15,000 - 73,000° per month or
more.
Source - payscale.com/research/IN/Job
=Computer_Aided_Design_(CAD)_Designer/
Salary

461

Trainee Designer — CAD Designer >
Senior Designer
The course is offered by the different Departments.
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Carpet Technology (IICT), Bhadohi, Uttar Pradesh
2. Indian Institute of Carpet Technology (IICT), Srinagar, Jammu & Kashmir
3. Government College of Art and Craft, Kolkata, West Bengal
4. National Institute of Fashion Technology, New Delhi
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
1. PMT Academy, New Delhi
2. JD Institute of Fashion Technology, Mumbai, Maharashtra
3. Design Studio CAD & IT Training Institute, Pune, Maharashtra
Obeetee Carpets utilizes craftsmanship of seven +
\ villages and now utilizes the CAD design software
Si for designing the carpets. They say- "Previously
- customers use to give us design, but with CAD we
Ceecccce give them options for same." They employ a team
of 15+ CAD carpet designers for the same.
= | Source - hitps;//www.youtube.com/watch?v
~ i” =LmeuRWz4DRo
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains
‘ 4, 4

ACAD Jewellery Designer creates jewellery designs with the help of a computer instead of a creating a 2D drawing
by hand on paper. A CAD Jewellery Designer typically has to combine hand-crafted pieces with 3D designed pieces
of jewellery.
ve ra)
PERSONALITY TRAITS w. ar
- You are interested in artistic occupations © vr x e°
« You are good with computers
¢ You like to build things
+ You like to have clear instructions to follow a@
a oe 2
SCHOLARSHIPS [= COURSE FEE
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit —
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are Y The approx. course 18S feliighes between
Central Government schemes offered by different INR 30,000 - 9,80,000".
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State “These figures are estimated numbers and
Schemes." will vary from Institute to Institute.
e NIFT's Sarthak and Udaan Schemes: The National
Institute of Fashion Technology (NIFT) offers two
scholarship schemes: Sarthak, a financial assistance —
scheme, and Udaan, a merit-based scheme. These ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
scholarships aim to support students pursuing fashion 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream.
and design courses, including jewelry design. ; . .
¢ AICTE Swanath Scholarship Scheme: Offered by the 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Science (B.Sc.)
All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), this in Gemology followed by Certified Training for
scheme provides financial support of 50,000 per Design CAD (programme aligned to G & J/Q 2303
annum to students from specific categories, such as released by the Gem & Jewellery Skills Council of
orphans, wards of parents who died due to COVID-19, India)
and wards of Armed Forces and Central Paramilitary OR
Forces martyred in action. Complete Bachelor's degree in Science (B.Sc.) in
e GIA India Scholarships: The Gemological Institute of Gemology followed by Master's degree in Design
America (GIA) offers scholarships for its gemology, (M.Des.) in any discipline, and then complete
jewelry, and design programs at the GIA India campus. C tif 4 Training for D ‘ CAD
Applicants complete one application to be considered ered training Tor Vesign .
for all available scholarships. py heck the durati ;
+ Scholarships are also available in the institutes based ease check the duration of the course during enrolment
on merit.”
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from time to
time)
EXPECTED INCOME
LOANS ‘The figures are indicative & subject to change.
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been The approx. salary of a CAD Jewellery
developed under the guidance of the Department of Designer ranges between INR 14,500 -
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of 71,200" per month
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian ’ ;
Banks Association (IBA)
+ Some states have student credit cards with low interest Source:
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. https.//www.payscale.com/research/IN/Jo
+ All banks give education loans b=Computer_Aided_Design_(CAD)_Designer
/ salary :
Q Dee ee ee 6 463

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Jewellery Manufacturing Units,
Jewellery Retail Stores. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH wy”
Entrepreneurship: You can also start a personal Designer (CAD) — Supervisor — Head
practise in this field. Designer
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is
applicable.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Design.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Delhi Technological University, New Delhi
2. Central Institute of Technology, Kokrajhar, Assam
3. National Institute of Fashion Technology, Kangra,
Himachal Pradesh
4. National Institute of Design, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh
5. National Institute of Design, Andhra Pradesh
6. National Institute of Fashion Technology, Bhopal,
Madhya Pradesh
7. National Institute of Fashion Technology, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu
8. Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj Nagpur University,
Maharashtra
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited with
UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Dr. Chandra Mohan Jha University, Jorabat, Meghalaya BELA sole els ALY a
2. Artemisia College of Art and Design, Indore, Madhya Farah Khan Ali is an Indian gemologist and
Pradesh jewelry designer, who is the founder and CEO of
3. Apeejay College of Fine Arts, Jalandhar, Punjab Farah Khan Fine Jewelry. She completed her
4. Asian Institute of Design, Bengaluru, Karnataka graduation in gemology and jewelry design
5. Alakh Prakash Goyal Shimla University, Shimla, from the Gemological Institute of America,
Himachal Pradesh Santa Monica, California, USA. She is also
6. Amrita School of Arts and Sciences, Kochi, Kerala skilled in CAD jewelry design.
7. Amity University, Gurugram, Haryana
8. CAT College of Architecture, Trivandrum, Kerala Source: https;//www.rough-polished.com
Jen/news/50367.html
Information on the institute rankings can be found
at - https;//wwwa.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html ‘The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains.
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
464

Ceramic technology is the Science of creating objects from inorganic, non-metallic material. A ceramic technologist
therefore is a person who makes use of this technology in the field of medicine, construction, electronics, military, opti-
cal fibres, sports and transportation and so on.
ww.
e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship - This
scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course.
Eligibility includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
¢ Swami Vivekananda Scholarship: This scholarship is
available to meritorious and economically
disadvantaged students in West Bengal. Students
enrolled in Ceramic Engineering programs, such as those
at the Government College of Engineering and Ceramic
Technology (GCECT) in Kolkata, can apply for this [=! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
scholarship. The scholarship amount con be up to © vrereerviontivnseuintinseitenseseeinensieatitentatnensieeeee
60,000 per annum, depending on the course and level 1. Complete 10 + 2 in the Science stream (Physics,
of study. : Chemistry and Maths).
Ota Le SCE Feo Te ale etoile 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Sc/BE/B.Tech)
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the . . . .
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course in Ceramic Engineering
fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions OR
under this scheme. * Complete a Diploma in Ceramic Engineering
e Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers OR
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The Master's degree in the same or allied field.
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical
disabilities, women and students from North East and . .
WRK" For admissions, you must qualify entrance
+ National Scholarship Portal - Visit examination conducted at national level (JEE Main,
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
Central Government schemes offered by different EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.”
+ Scholarships are also available in institutes based on Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
merit.”
+ “(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for Gi
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
+ Some States have student credit cards with low interest eo.
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. ee
+ All banks give education loans. _—
465

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
>
~d
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Andhra University College of Engineering, Visakhapatnam,
Andhra Pradesh
2. \IT BHU, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh
3. NIT Rourkela, Odisha
A. Visvesvaraya Technological University, Belagavi, Karnataka
5. Alagappa College of Technology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
6. Lukhdhirji Engineering College, Morbi, Gujarat
7. Government College of Engineering and Ceramic
Technology, Kolkata, West Bengal
8. Prof Rajendra Singh University, Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before
applying) EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD EJ
1. HKE Society's PDA College of Engineering, Gulbarga,
Karnataka
2. AKS University, Satna, Madhya Pradesh
3. Aditya College of Technology and Science, Satna,
Madhya Pradesh
4. Mewar University, Chittorgarh, Rajasthan
5. RN Shetty Rural Polytechnic, Bhatkal, Karnataka
6. Swami Vivekanand University, Sagar, Madhya Pradesh
7, Bhagwant University, Ajmer, Rajasthan
8. Shri Krishna University, Chhatarpur, Madhya Pradesh
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
466

Chemical Engineers apply the principles of Chemistry, Biology, Physics, and Math to solve problems that involves
changing raw materials into useful products. A Chemical Engineer is responsible for the design, manufacture, and op-
eration of plants and machinery in various industries.
e
% Ug
Bo. oe
wo
. e ;
. ( f e .
. e }
a
0. 4
e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship - |
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the =
first year of their engineering undergraduate course.
Eligibility includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
¢ Swami Vivekananda Scholarship - This
merit-cum-means scholarship is offered by the
Government of West Bengal to support economically
disadvantaged students pursuing higher education,
including engineering courses. The scholarship amount =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
vaties sagcclontne bvelloi stl) emsitoins inten O vrerevsvtnnessstnsssouanscestnsersatnnsnsesesseenanseenanssee
e Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000 ae let | 10 +2 inthe Sci
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the - Lomplete your class N+ 4 in ine science
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course stream (Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics).
fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Tech/BE) in
under this scheme. * Chemical Engineering
e Indian Oil Educational Scholarship - The IOC Ltd OR
offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Complete Bachelor's degree and follow it up with
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate Master’s (M.Tech) in Chemical Engineering.
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students
with physical disabilities, women and students from For admissions, you must qualify entrance
North East and J&K." ore : .
; : examination conducted at national level (JEE Main,
* National Scholarship Portal - Visit JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are an !
Central Government schemes offered by different EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State
Schemes." Entrance Exam/CCSHAU Entrance Exam/Assam
+ Scholarships are also available in institutes based on Agriculture University VET/Rajasthan JET/AGRICET.
merit.” “Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
‘(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)
¢ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of le"
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
+ Some States have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
+ All banks give education loans. an
» 467

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH wy”
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Chemical Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra
3. Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi
A. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, Maharashtra
5. Annamalai University, Chidambaram, Tamil Nadu
6. Jiwaji University, Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh
7. Malaviya National Institute of Technology, Jaipur, Rajasthan
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with
UGC and AICTE before applying)
]. Chandigarh University, Chandigarh
2. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan
3. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu
4. Nirma University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
5. Thapar University, Patiala, Punjab
6. Birla Institute of Technology, Ranchi, Jharkhand EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
7. Manipal University, Jaipur, Rajasthan
8. Sathyabama University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
468

Civil Engineers design and maintain structures such as public and private buildings, water systems, airports and roads.
Structural Engineers analyze, design, build and maintain the structures and materials that counteract or reinforce
loads. Some of the tasks a Civil Engineer, is expected to perform include planning, organizing and supervising con-
struction and repair of bridges, factories, towers, etc.; calculating and preparing estimated cost and detailed draw-
ings; arranging for men, material, machinery and appliances, etc.
mA |
» | i=
| Co
= i =lb
a | ,
=> | a | \ a.
AS
\ \ oe
sibs °.
e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship . .
- This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the }
first year of their engineering undergraduate course. : :
Eligibility includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
e AICTE Swanath Scholarship Scheme - Offered by the
All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), this
scheme provides financial support to students from
specific categories, such as orphans, wards of parents
who died due to COVID-19, and wards of Armed
Forces and Central Paramilitary Forces martyred in
action [= EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
 Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About ceussssssussnessssassuesnsesecsusescnnssueauesuecsessnessenuesteceeeneas
20,000 such engineering scholarships are awarded b . . .
the Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full : I. Complete 10+2 in Science stream (Physics,
course fees of awardees is directly paid to their Chemistry and Maths).
institutions under this scheme. * 2. Complete Bachelor’s degree (B.Tech./B.E.) in
¢ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship - The |OC Lid Civil Engineering
offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible students. OR
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate Complete Bachelor's d dth
. . plete bachelors aegree an en pursue a
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students , an . .
with physical disabilities, women and students from Master's degree (M.Tech./M.E.) in Civil Engineering.
North East and J&K.*
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit Entrance Exams for admission to UG course such as
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portay ere are JEE Mains, TNEA, MET, KCET, VITEE, etc. are
Central government schemes offered by different ‘ ‘ ‘
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State conducted at the national, state or university level.
Schemes.” , .
+ Scholarships are also available in the institutes based Master's course requires entrance exams such as
on merit.” CAT, GATE, GRE.
‘(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of le"
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
« Some States have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, tk
etc. oe
+ All banks give education loans. ve
Dee ew eee ee ee ee 469

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
This course is offered by the Department of Civil Engineering/ Structural Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal
3. Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, Uttarakhand
4. Indian Institute of Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
5. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
6. Coimbatore Institute of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
7. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad University of Technology, Kolkata, West Bengal
8. Veer Surendra Sai University of Technology, Burla, Odisha
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Chitkara University Institute of Engineering and Technology,
Chandigharh
2. University of Petroleum and Energy Studies,
Dehradun, Uttarakhand
3. Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology,
Bhubaneswar, Odisha
4. SASTRA Deemed University, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu
5. Lovely Professional University, Phagwara, Punjab
6. Jaipur National University, Jaipur, Rajasthan
7. Amity University, Raipur, Chhattisgarh
8. Chandigarh University, Ajitgarh, Punjab
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
470

A Corrosion Engineer determines ways to repair or prevent corrosion on industrial machinery at a
manufacturing plant or infrastructure projects, such as metal bridges, oil and gas pipelines, mines, and waste man-
agement facilities. They mainly try to prevent corrosion on materials by making use of their
expertise.
: : y
e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the
first year of their engineering undergraduate course.
Eligibility includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
¢ AMPP EMERG India Scholarships - The Association =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
for Materials Protection and Performance (AMPP) © vivsessvsnntsvstsssssuensoettnsnrsornneresunerseeaenenesnseee
offers scholarships to outstanding students in India 1. Complete 10 + 2 in the Science stream (Physics,
pursuing careers in corrosion science and engineering. Chemistry and Mathematics).
Each award provides INR 150,000. Eligibility includes 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.E./B.Tech.) in
enrollment in a sul elle oleae Metallurgical Engineering or Materials Science
¢ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000 followed by M.Tech. in Corrosion Science and '
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the y™ .
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course Technology
fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions OR
under this scheme. * Complete Bachelor's degree (B.E./B.Tech.) in
e Indian Oil Educational Scholarship - The |OC Ltd Metallurgical Engineering or Materials Science,
offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible students. followed by PG Diploma in Corrosion Technology.
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students For admissions, you must qualify entrance
with physical disabilities, women and students from examination conducted at national level ( JEE Main,
North A Sc cae 1 JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
A ae holarship Portal - Visit EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are '
pees ey fia aealislgaes roe Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Schemes.”
¢ Scholarships are also available in institutes based on
merit.”
‘(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for Gi
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
« Some States have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. an
+ All banks give education loans. _
rr 2

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You can find employment opportunities
in Construction, Energy industry, including Offshore drilling
operations, Industrial manufacturing, Aerospace EXPECTED GROWTH PATH wy
engineering and Mining. Project Engineer — Systems Engineer >
Manager, Engineering
Work Environment: Research timings are generally fixed
for 5 or 6 days a week and 8 or 9 hours everyday. This
may vary from organization to organization and shift
system might be applicable.
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES p
1. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu [lia
2. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra
3. Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi
4. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal
5. Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal
6. Annamalai University, Chidambaram, Tamil Nadu fF
7. National Institute of Technology, Durgapur, West Bengal D
8. National Institute Of Technology, Patna, Bihar
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Chandigarh University, Chandigarh
2. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan
3. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu
4. Nirma University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
5. Thapar University, Patiala, Punjab
6. Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra, Rachi, Jharkhand
7. Manipal University, Jaipur, Rajasthan
8. Sathyabama University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
472

DESIGN ENGINEER .
ww bs
A Design Engineer is a designer who Is focused on the win _— Fm oo ae”
engineering design process in any of the various engineering ae o v}
disciplines. Design Engineers use computer softwares to create |
designs and develop prototypes to test their ideas. OG >
Har |
PERSONALITY TRAITS WW.
+ You like to build things
« You are good with computers =
« You are comfortable working in groups FEES COURSE FEE
+ You enjoy figuring out how things work RC, The approx. course fee ranges between
INR 10,000 - 8,00,000°.
“These figures are estimated numbers and
will vary from Institute to Institute.
SCHOLARSHIPS
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit =
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY _
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and 1. Complete 10 + 2 in the Science stream (Physics,
State Schemes” Chemistry and Mathematics).
e Foundation for Excellence Scholarships- The 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Design
Foundation for Excellence offers scholarships to Engineering (B.Tech./B.E.)
meritorious students from economically OR
elclelvchiteleoxel lselol retitels [etNsulng . Complete Bachelor's degree in Design
undergraduate engineering courses, including Enai . . ;
Desion Enoi ; ' ‘zed institutions in ngineering (B.Tech./B.E.) and follow it up with
ign Engineering, at recogniz ; ; . .
India. The scholarship covers tuition fees and other Master's degree in Design Engineering
academic expenses. (M.Tech./M.E.)
« Sanskriti - Geddes Scholarship- The Sanskriti OR
Foundation provides the Geddes Scholarship to Complete Bachelor's degree in Design
support students pursuing studies in Planning and Engineering (B.Tech./B.E.) and follow it up with
Architecture, which includes Design Engineering. Master's degree in Design Engineering
The scholarship amount and eligibility criteria are (M.Tech./M.E.) and then complete PG Diploma in
detailed on the official website. _ Engineering Design.
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes
5 onan me holarships can vary from For admissions in a B.Tech. course, you must
ea ormese senorarsn'P y qualify JEE Main. JEE Advanced is needed for
admissions to IITs. Other entrance exams can be
LOANS taken: ICAR/GATE/AIEEA/MHT/CET/
¢ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a UPCATET/AP EAMCET/CG PAT/SHIATS Entrance
portal for students seeking education loan. This Exam/CCS HAU Entrance Exam/Rajasthan
portal has been developed under the guidance of JET/AGRICET.
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Department of Higher Education Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
(Ministry of Education) and Indian Banks
Association (IBA)
- Some states have student credit cards with low EXPECTED INCOME
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, ‘The figures are indicative & subject to change.
Bihar, etc.
> Alllpeliles ete eeliseiten pein The approx. salary of a Design Engineer
ranges between INR 15,000 - 84,000* per
month.
Source: https:;//www.payscale.com/re- oe
search/IN/Job=Design_Engineer/Salary _
BQ wet e ee ee ee 473

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Sectors such as Thermal Power, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ~~
Gas Turbines, Agricultural Sector, Air Conditioning
and Refrigeration, etc. Junior Designer — Design Engineer —
; _ Senior Design Engineer — Lead Design
Work Environment: The work timings are Engineer — Technical Manager — Project
typically 5 to 6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per
day. Shift system is applicable. Manager
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering/Design
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi
3. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal
4. National Institute of Technology, Mangalore, Karnataka
5. National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
6. Institute of Fashion Technology, Kollam, Kerala
7. National Institute of Design, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh
8. Jadhavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Alakh Prakash Goyal Shimla University, Shimla,
Himachal Pradesh
2. Chandigarh University, Chandigarh EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
3.D J Academy of Design, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
4. Hans Raj Mahila Maha Vidyalaya, Jalandhar, Punjab Rajeev Chandrasekhar is the Union Minister of
5. Indian Institute of Art and Design, New Delhi State for Electronics and Information Technology
6. International School of Design, Kolkata, West Bengal as well as the Union Minister of State for Skill
7. Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology, Bhubaneswar, Development and Entrepreneurship. He is an
Odisha Indian politician and entrepreneur, technocrat and
8. Khvati School of Desian, Ahmedabad. Guiarat was serving his third term as a Member of
aia de eldest al Parliament in the upper house (Rajya Sabha) from
. . _, ; BJP representing Karnataka. Between 1986-1991
Information on institute rankings is available at - . .
Prigoff oneal Dac Roucgoy/ OEY ea acs pital he worked at Intel as Senior Design Engineer and
PS; , Or" 9: a CPU architect on the 80486 and Pentium
Microprocessors. He completed his Master’s in
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE Computer Science in 1986 from Illinois Institute of
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) Chicago.”
Source: https;//rajeev.in/about/
474 ‘The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains

A Development Operations Engineer deploys automation in a company .@:
to enhance its productivity. Development Operations Engineers support .@:
the development and operation of software through tools, environments
and practices. >
Mar
PERSONALITY TRAITS w. ° _
* You are good with computers +—--
¢ You like working with numbers fe)
+ You like to analyse problems/ situations i
« You are a practical person
=
SCHOLARSHIPS
e Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt for
engineering-specific scholarships such as IndusInd rees | COURSE FEE
Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan Singh —O The approx. course fee ranges between
Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar YG INR 45,000 - 10.00.000*
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme Of -
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on* ‘These figures are estimated numbers and
e National Scholarship Portal - Please visit hs WGI wed HD Ve EES
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and = EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
State Schemes. © cee ee cece eee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeenees
e IET India Scholarship Award 2025 - The Institution 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
of Engineering and Technology (IET) India Chemistry and Mathematics).
Scholarship Award recognizes and nurtures future 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
engineering leaders. The 8th edition is currently (B Tech/B.Sc,/BCA/B.E,) in Computer
accepting applications. The scholarship aims to ‘ SO p
support students demonstrating excellence in ectence/Information System
engineering and technology. ,
e PM Yashasvi Scholarship Scheme - Launched by Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
the Government of India, the PM Yashasvi Scheme Master's degree (M.Tech/M.Sc./MCA/M.E.) in the
provides financial assistance to meritorious students same field.
from economically disadvantaged backgrounds. The OR
scholarship covers tuition fees, book allowances, Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Sc.) in
and living expenses. Mathematics followed by a Master's degree
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from time (M.Sc.) in the same field.
to time)
LOANS Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
- VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal
for students seeking education loan. This portal has a a aa aa aaa e aaa
been developed under the guidance of the
Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of EXPECTED INCOME
Finance), Department of Higher Education (Ministry | “The figures are indicative & subject to change. 1
of Education) and Indian Banks Association (IBA).
Students can view, apply and track the education | The approx. salary of a Development
loan applications on the website. Operations Engineer ranges between
- Some states have student credit cards with low i INR 30,334 - 1,67,000" per month.
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, 5 https:// | /
Bihar, etc. ource: https:;//www.payscale.com,
+ All banks give education loans. research/IN/Job=Development_ a
1 Operations_(DevOps)_Engineer/Salary Jee
BQ er 72.

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You can work in IT companies or in the
IT Department of various companies. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH le
Release Manager — Development
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to Operations Test Engineer >
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is Develooment Operations Cloud
applicable. } P P ;
Engineer — Development Operations
Entrepreneurship: You can pursue freelancing in this Architect
domain as well as work in your own company.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science,
Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivakasi, Tamil Nadu
3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi
4. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences, New Delhi
6. College of Applied Science, Kozhikode, Kerala
7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan
8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Annai College of Arts and Science, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu
2. AD Patel Institute of Technology, New Vallabh Nagar, Gujarat
3. All India Institute of Management Studies, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
4. Acropolis Institute of Management Studies and
Research, Indore, Madhya Pradesh 66
5. Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, Kolkata, West Bengal EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD
6. Bangalore City College, Bengaluru, Karnataka Jasleen Kaur works as a DevOps Security in
7. Bapatla Engineering College, Bapatla, Andhra Pradesh Operation Team in Martello Technologies, Canada.
8. Bonnie Fol College, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh bp: She manages vulnerabilities of applications by
9. Birla Institute of Technology And Science, Pilani, Rajasthan performing penetration testing and scanning. She
10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka has done her Masters of Information Security System
11. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu from Concordia University, Montreal QC, and
Ice Mhtefpser Cicer, Pentel, rianyfe's started her career in 2015 as a security engineer in
. . oo, . India. She first interned with one of the government
Information on Institute rankings is available at - oraanizations and then did a few certifications.”
httos://www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html g ,
Source: https;//martellotech.com/blog/martellos-w
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE omen-in-tech-series-devops-security/
Indira Gandhi National Open University “The above information is for training purposes only and will not
(IGNOU), New Delhi be used for any commercial gains
476

The concepts of electrical and electronics both deal with electricity. Electrical devices produce voltage and current
and electronic devices control the voltage and current. Hence, electrical engineers are
primarily concerned with the generation, transmission and distribution of electrical power. Whereas
electronic engineers design, develop and test components, devices, systems or equipment that use
electricity as part of their source of power.
XK
“4 \
¢ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship - —____}
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the
first year of their engineering undergraduate course.
Eligibility includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
¢ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About
20,000 such engineering scholarships are awarded by
the Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course =
fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
under this scheme. ~ . .
+ AICTE Pragati Scholarship for Girls - Offered by the All 1. Complete 10+2 in Science stream ( Physics,
India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), this Chemistry and Mathematics).
scholarship supports female students pursuing technical 2. Complete Bachelor’s degree (B.Tech/B.E) in
degrees, including Electrical and Electronics Electrical/Communication Engineering
Engineering. It provides financial assistance for tuition OR
fees and other academic expenses. Eligibility includes Complete diploma in Electrical or Communication
being a female student enrolled in the first year of a Enai :
: gineering
technical degree program at an AICTE-approved OR
institution. The application deadline is typically in , .
ee ee Complete Bachelor’s degree in
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The OC Ltd Electrical/Communication Engineering, followed by
offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible students. a Master's degree in the same field.
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students For admissions, you must qualify JEE Main. JEE
with physical disabilities, women and students from Advanced is needed for admissions to IITs. Other
Netti Beast eee . entrance exams can be taken such as GATE/
e National Scholarship Portal - visit BITSAT and so on
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there are .
central government schemes offered by different . .
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes” Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Scholarships are also available in institutes based on merit*
“(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for es
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website. ve
+ Some states have student credit cards with low interest _
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. o
+ All banks give education loans. cee ee ee ee ee we
477

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH wy”
A | ee is
— fe
— ia
— ; = a
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY? —|= | a
=
The course is offered by the Department of Electrical and Electronics. 9 = \
This list of institutes is indicative only = ‘
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu w
2. Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi
3. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra
A. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal
5. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
6. Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, Uttarakhand
7. Government Polytechnic, Mumbai, Maharashtra
8. Government Polytechnic, Pune, Maharashtra
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Christ University, Bangalore, Karnataka
2. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan
3. Sharda University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh
4. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu
5. Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra, Rajasthan
6. Manipal University, Jaipur, Rajasthan
7. Presidency University, Bangalore, Karnataka EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66 |
Information on institute rankings is available at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
478

ELECTRONIC DESIGNER © cm.
/VLSI/EMBEDDED SYSTEM DESIGNER imi °
= = 0
2] a a |
~ Baa t |
An Electronic Designer/VLSI/Embedded System Designer helps design, de- =20
velop, and maintain embedded systems in products. The role often includes =: fe) ©
software development. An embedded system is a central component that . bene = fe) GG
performs computational tasks. I oo o
* *
PERSONALITY TRAITS yw.
« You are good with computers ;
¢ You pay attention to details while working
+ You like to have clear instructions to follow
« You like to work in a team FEES COURSE FEE
e approx. course fee ranges between
vn Y The app f ges b
INR 20,000 - 10,00,000%*.
‘These figures are estimated numbers and
SCHOLARSHIPS will vary from Institute to Institute.
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there iB EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
are Central Government schemes offered by AO vesesccsereseeeeeeeseeeseeterens
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and 1. Complete 10 + 2 in Science stream (Physics,
State Schemes.’ Chemistry and Mathematics).
e AICTE Pragati Scholarship for Girls - Offered by 2. Complete Bachelor’s degree in Technology
the All India Council for Technical Education (B.Tech.)/Engineering (B.E.) in
(AICTE), this scholarship supports female students Electrical/Electronic Engineering, followed by
pursuing technical degrees, including Electronics Master's degree (M.Tech,/M.E.) in the same
Design and VLSI. discipline
+ AICTE Saksham Scholarship Scheme - This OR .
scheme aims to support differently-abled students Complete Bachelor 8 degree in Technology
. ; ; . ' (B.Tech.)/Engineering (B.E.) in
pursuing technical degrees, including Electronics ; . . .
. . . . Electrical/Electronic Engineering followed by
Design and VLSI. It offers financial assistance for ; . ; .
- Master's degree in Science (M.S.) in VLSI.
tuition fees and other academic expenses.
* Scholarships lis also available in the institutes For admissions, you must quality JEE Main. JEE
based on merit. Advanced is needed for admissions to IITs. Other
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from entrance exams can be taken such as GATE/
time to time) BITSAT, etc.
LOANS Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of EXPECTED INCOME
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of RITES CT ERICSON AE SIO STERES
Finance), Department of Higher Education The approx. salary of a Electronic/VLSI/
(Ministry of Education) and Indian Banks Embedded System Designer ranges between
Association (IBA) INR 25,000 - 2,50,000* per month
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Source: hitps///www.payscale.com/re-
. search/IN/Job=Very-Large-Scale_In- vs
Bihar, etc. tegration_(VLSI)_Engineer/Salar _
+ All banks give education loans gravion— eng! y _
XQ SODDDDID DS ga

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Product Companies, IP EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
Companies, Foundries, Service Companies and ; ; ;
a
Designer — Design Director — Chief Design
Work Environment: The work timings are Officer
typically 5 to 6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per
day. Shift system is applicable.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only zp
a oo ]
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu eae
2. IIT Delhi, New Delhi y, Nt
3. IIT Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra fa A
4. IIT Kharagpur, Kharagpur, West Bengal BE aN < )
5. IIT Kanpur, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh A
6. IIT Roorkee, Rurkee, Uttarakhand >
7. Government Polytechnic, Mumbai, Maharashtra \ Bo
8. Government Polytechnic, Pune, Maharashtra
wet bef nen see
—
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD Gg
I. Christ University, Bengaluru, Kamataka oe Venkata Simhadri is an Indian electrical
2. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pillani, Rajasthan . h ialises in embedded
3. Sharda University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh aie tai . .
. ; systems engineering. He has received his
4. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu Bachelor's degree in Electrical and Electronics
5), Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra, Ranchi, Jharkhand engineering from Andhra University and has
6. Manipal University, Jaipur, Rajasthan completed an MS in Electrical Engineering from
7. Presidency University, Bengaluru, Karnataka New Jersey Institute of Technology. He has
worked in companies such as Time To Market,
Information on the institute rankings can be found Infotech Enterprises, Gigacom Semiconductor
at - https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html and is currently the CEO and
Managing Director at MosChip.*
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) Source:
https;//www.cxotoday.com/interviews/india-em
erges-as-a-leader-with-
strong-presence-of-major-semiconductor-compa
nies-visi-expert-venkata
-simhadri/
‘The above information is for training purposes only and will
480 not be used for any commercial gains

Electronics and Communication Engineering entails designing, planning, building and testing electronic equipment
used in various systems such as basic electronics, microprocessors, solid-state devices, digital and analog communi-
cation devices and so on. Electronics and Communications engineers also oversee the manufacturing of communica-
tions and broadcast systems such as basic electronics.
is
u « A ys
< < RE
=
¢ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship - This we
scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first 6
year of their engineering undergraduate course.
Eligibility includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
¢ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course
fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions
under this scheme. * =
e Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students . . :
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical Chemistry and Mathematics).
disabilities, women and students from North East and 2. Complete Bachelor’s degree (B.Tech.) in
J&K.” Electrical Engineering/Communications Engineering
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit OR
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are Complete Bachelor's degree in Electrical
Central Government schemes offered by different . . ee . .
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” Engineering/Communications Engineering, followed
» AICTE Pragati Scholarship for Girls - Offered by the All by a Master's degree (M.Tech) in the same
India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), this discipline.
scholarship supports female students pursuing technical
degrees, including Electronics Design and VLSI. | For admissions, you must qualify entrance
+ AICTE Saksham Scholarship Scheme - This scheme examination conducted at national level (JEE Main,
aims to support differently-abled students pursuing JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBIJEE, AP
technical degrees, including Electronics Design and VLSI. EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc )
It offers financial assistance for tuition fees and other . ' -
academic expenses. .
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes based on Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
merit.”
*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) Fi
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the quidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and °
track the education loan applications on the website. _
+ Some states have student credit cards with low interest o
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. ee ee ee eee eee
+ All banks give education loans. se es
481

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: Electronics companies across India or in
Telecommunications companies, Manufacturers or also as EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7"
Installers of Communication devices and systems.
Junior Technician — Electronic Engineer >
Work Environment: Companies usually work for 5 to 6 Senior Technical Manager
days a week and 8 to 9 hours everyday. This may vary OR
Henne upemy Vedcclan ofelyeciaui3 fascial lal fies) Junior Technician —+ Communications
ae Engineer — Senior Technical Manager
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Electronics and
Communication Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi
2. Maharaja Sayaqjirao University (MSU), Baroda, Gujarat
3. Aliah University, Kolkata, West Bengal
4. Gauhati University, Guwahati, Assam
5. Government Polytechnic, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
6. Government College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
7. \ndian Institute of Technology, Bombay, Maharashtra
8. Tezpur University, Tezpur, Assam
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Heritage Institute of Technology, Kolkata, West Bengal
2. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka
3. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu
A. SRM Institute of Science and Techonology, Chennai EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD CJ
Tamil Nadu . . . .
5. Nirma University, Anmedabad, Gujarat ee aan Mies | sso as
6. Indian Institute of Information Technology (IIIT), ISP! ive, 9
Guwahati, Assam Electronics and Telecommunications engineer
. - . from Mangalore University, India in 1989 . He
7. Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology, Bhubaneswar, . . .
Odisha started his professional life as a Production
8. Dr Ambedkar Institute of Technology, Bengaluru, Engineer at Caleom Electronics. After spending
Karnataka five years in ICL India and Churchgate Group,
Nigeria, he moved to NSN India as System
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - Marketing Manager in 1998. Wathin ¢ decade ne
www nirfindi.org/2023/Ranking.himl soared up the ranks to the position of Senior Vice
‘ , . President Nokia Networks Asia Pacific and on
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE October 1, 2009 he was appointed Chief
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) Executive Officer of Nokia Solutions and .
Networks (then Nokia Siemens Networks).
Source : https://manipal.edu/mu/alumni/
eminent-personalities/list/rajeev-suri.html
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
23 not be used for any commercial gains.

Environmental Engineers use the principles of soil science, biology, and chemistry to design solutions for ecological
issues such as waste disposal, erosion, water and air pollution. They design technological solutions to control pollution
and contamination. They are responsible for improving the environment and public health.
|

« Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -

This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first

year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility

includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the

Government of India for economically backward

students who have a strong aptitude for scientific

research.”

. Moin Re Tas 51210 S| Scholarship - About 20,000 = EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY

such engineering scholarships are awarded by the ( © reetoreprsiessepeterrstrrerrrss

Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees : : ‘

of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this Chomeiny ond Mathematico, stream (Physics,

scheme. ° 2. Complete Bachelor’s degree (B.Tech/B.E.) in

¢ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The |OC Ltd offers Environmental Engineering

300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students OR

need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The Complete Bachelor's degree in Environmental

scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical Engineering, followed by a Master's degree

disabilities, women and students from North East and (M.Tech/M.E.)

J&K.* OR

«National Scholarship Portal - Visit Pursue your Diploma in Environmental Engineering.

www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are . .

Central Government schemes offered by different Students must qualify for JEE Mains and JEE

departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes." Advanced or the entrance examination conducted

« Scholarships are also available in institutes based on by respective state governments such as WBIEE or

_ AP EAMCET.

merit.

“(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) Please check the duration of the course during enrolment

+ VidyaLakshmi, www. vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for

students seeking education loan. This portal has been e-

developed under the guidance of the Department of

Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of

Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian

Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and

track the education loan applications on the website.

« Some states have student credit cards with low interest

rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. _

+ All banks give education loans. ce

Pee eee ee 5 483

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Environment Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. National Institute of Technology, Kurukshetra, Haryana
2.|ndian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Uttarakhand
3. National Institute of Technology, Warangal, Telangana
4. Delhi Technological University, New Delhi
5. The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Gujarat
6. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra
7. Indian Institute of Technology, Dhanbad, Jharkhand
8. Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad, Telangana
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Hindustan Institute of Technology and Science, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu
2. Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute (VJTI), Mumbai,
Maharashtra EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD MJ
3. Singhania University, Jhunjhunu, Rajasthan
4. Shri KJ Polytechnic, Bharuch, Gujarat
5. University of Technology, Jaipur, Rajasthan
6. College Of Engineering Pune (COEP), Maharashtra
7. Sri Ramaswamy Memorial (SRM) University, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu
8. Manipal Institute of Technology (MIT), Manipal, Karnataka
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
484

Fire Safety Engineers work on the architecture and design of a structure to minimise the risk posed by fire. They also
determine what fire protection equipment a structure needs to effectively battle a fire in the event of one.
a
“4 Y
}
___ "=F <
| )
wr OI f

e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana |
Scholarship - This scholarship is provided to students |
enrolled in the first year of their engineering |
undergraduate course. Eligibility includes an aptitude |
test. It is awarded by the Government of India for
economically backward students who have a strong ‘
aptitude for scientific research.”

e Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About
20,000 such engineering scholarships are awarded
by the Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full
course fees of awardees is directly paid to their
institutions under this scheme.”

e Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The |OC Ltd
offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible —
students. Students need to be enrolled in an EN EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
undergraduate course. The scholarship particularly
focuses on students with physical disabilities, women 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
and students from North East and J&K.* Chemistry and Mathematics).

+ National Scholarship Portal - Visit 2. Complete Bachelor’s in Fire and Safety/ Fire
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there are Safety and Hazard Management/Fire & Industrial
Central government schemes offered by different Engineering
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State OR
Schemes.” : : _ Pursue a Diploma in the similar field

« Scholarships are also available in the institutes based OR
on merit.” : : Complete Bachelor's and then pursue an MBA in Fire

*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to and Safety Management.

time)

Please check the duration of the course during enrolment

« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal
for students seeking education loan. This portal has
been developed under the guidance of the Ga
Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Department of Higher Education (Ministry
of Education) and Indian Banks Association (IBA).

Students can view, apply and track the education
loan applications on the website.

+ Some States have student credit cards with low —
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, ee
Bihar, etc. _

« All banks give education loans. a

ce ee ee ee ee ee age

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH wy”
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj University, Nagpur, Maharashtra
2. National Fire Service College, Nagpur, Maharashtra
3. School of Engineering Cochin University of Science and Technology, Kochi, Kerala
4, Hemchandracharya North Gujarat University, Patan, Matarvadi Part, Gujarat
5. National Institute Of Fire & Safety Management, Kolkata, West Bengal
6. Darbhanga College of Engineering, Darbhanga, Bihar
7. Chhattisgarh Swami Vivekanand Technical University, Bhilai, Chhattisgarh
8. Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology, Mubarakpur, Uttar Pradesh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying )
1. School of Engineering, University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, Dehradun
2. Defence Institute of Advanced Technology, Pune, Maharashtra
3. OPJS University, Sadulpur, Rajasthan
4. Sandip University, Nashik, Maharashtra
5. Galgotias University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
6. Medi-Caps University, Indore, Madhya Pradesh
7. JS University, Shikohabad, Uttar Pradesh
8. Singhania University, Jnunjhunu, Rajasthan
Information on the institute rankings can be found
at - https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
486

Food engineering is a scientific and multidisciplinary field related to food manufacturing. Food engineers are responsi-
ble for implementing new industrial processes for transforming raw materials into edible forms. The field also includes
packaging, storage, and distribution.
e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship vr
- This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the :| 2 of ik OULU iy
first year of their engineering undergraduate course.
Eligibility includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward |
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
e AICTE Pragati Scholarship for Girls - Offered by the
All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), this
scholarship supports female students pursuing technical
degrees, including Electronics Design and VLSI.
¢ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About
20,000 such engineering scholarships are awarded by
the Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full [=! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
course fees of awardees is directly paid to their D oiicecseetsessesessnessessssesssnsentessesssessnessnessssesnessess
institutions under this scheme. ” 1. Complete 10+2 in Science stream (Physics,
e Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The |OC Lid Chemistry and Mathematics).
offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible students. 2. Complete Bachelor's degree
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate (B.Tech./B.E./B.Sc.) in Agricultural
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students Engineering/Food Engineering/ Food Science /
with physical disabilities, women and students from Food Science and Technology/Biochemical
North East and J&K." Engineering or other allied subjects.
+ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there are For admissions, you must qualify entrance
Central government schemes offered by different examination conducted at national level (JEE Main,
elgasiinnenis, USC / NCIS Selrsmeseitel Sielis JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
Schemes.” EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
+ Scholarships are also available in the institutes based
enna Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
‘(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been e-
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
+ Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. _
« All banks give education loans. ee
Deen ee ee 487

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7"

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Food Technology.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal
2. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal
3. Tezpur University, Tezpur, Assam
4. Alagappa College of Technology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
5. National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu
6. Vaugh Institute of Agricultural Engineering and Technology, Allahabad, Sonipath, Haryana
7. Kerala Agricultural University, Thrissur, Kerala
8. National Institute of Technology, Rourkela, Odisha
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Singhania University, Jhunjhunu, Rajasthan EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
2. Dr DY Patil Biotechnology and Bioinformatics Institute,

Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra
3. Dhanalakshmi Srinivasan Engineering College, Perambalur,

Tamil Nadu
4. Musaliar College of Engineering, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala
5. Jaya Institute of Technology, Kanchipadi, Tamin Nadu
6. Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh
7. Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat
8. Kalasalingam Academy of Research and Education,

Tamil Nadu
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html

488

Footwear Designers create new designs and sample patterns for
women's, men's and children's footwear. A Footwear Designer tries
to create innovative products, based on the current trends while At
satisfying their clients. iY
+4 *
PERSONALITY TRAITS WY.
» You like to build things ce
+ You have a creative bent of mind S)
¢ You are comfortable in communicating with others —- 4
e You like to have clear instructions to follow —S SF A
—o~
SCHOLARSHIPS
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and rees | COURSE FEE
State Schemes” —
. Y The approx. course fee ranges between
e Uttar Pradesh Government Scholarship Scheme INR 30,000 - 8.64,000°.
- For students from Uttar Pradesh pursuing higher .
education, including design courses. Eligible ‘These figures are estimated numbers and
students can apply through the state's scholarship will vary from Institute to Institute.
portal.
¢ Mukhyamantri Medhavi Yojna (Madhya
Pradesh) - A scholarship scheme by the Madhya =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
Pradesh government for meritorious students © veosesesssesesssntesessnesessaecesssesssseessens
pursuing professional courses, including design. 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream.
Applications can be submitted online. 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Design (B.Des.)
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes in Footwear Design followed by Master's degree
based on merit” (M.Des.) in the same discipline
Pee . OR
(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Complete a Bachelor's degree in Design (B.Des.)
time to time) . eer ;
in any discipline followed by Master's degree
(M.Des.) in Footwear Designing.
LOANS Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of EXPECTED INCOME
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of ie" “The figures are indicative & subject to change.
Finance), Department of Higher Education
(Ministry of Education) and Indian Banks The approx. salary of a Footwear Designer
Association (IBA) ranges between INR 30,000 - 1,15,000* per
« Some states have student credit cards with low month or more.
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc. Source: https://www.ambitionbox.com/pro- :
; ; file/footwear-designer-salary .
« All banks give education loans .
Qi 489

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Design Consultancy Firms, Footwear EXPECTED GROWTH PATH Tm
Production and Trading Companies, Retail and Wholesale
Companies, Import or Export Industry, Merchandising Trainee Footwear Designer — Footwear
Companies, Product Manufacturing Companies, Corporate Designer — Senior Footwear Designer >
Businesses, etc. Design Lead
Entrepreneurship: You can also start a Footwear Designer
company on your own.
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 or 6
days a week for 8 or 9 hours per day. Shift system is
applicable.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Design
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Footwear Design and Development Institute (FDDI), Chandigarh
2. Footwear Design and Development Institute (FDDI), Chennai, Tamil Nadu
3. Footwear Design and Development Institute (FDDI), Jodhpur, Rajasthan
4. Central Footwear Training Centre, Pujali, West Bengal
5. Central Footwear Training Institute, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
6. Footwear Design and Development Institute, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh
7. National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, Gujarat € a
8. National Institute of Design, Jorhat, Assam xP ® u™
YQ BS
PRIVATE INSTITUTES we
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying) —'
¥ — A eN
1. Artemisia College of Art and Design, Indore, Madhya Pradesh s wy |; ~
2. Apeejay College of Fine Arts, Jalandhar, Punjab s a, a=
3. Alakh Prakash Goyal Shimla University, Shimla,
Himachal Pradesh
4. Amrita School of Arts and Sciences, Kochi, Kerala
5. Amity University, Gurugram, Haryana EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
6. Indian Institute of Art and Design, New Delhi Payal Kothari is an Indian Footwear Designer who
7. Chandigarh University, Chandigarh is the founder of ‘Veruschka’, one of the leading
designer footwear stores in the country. Payal is
an alumnus of the National Institute of Fashion
Technology, and has graduated in the technical
art of accessory design (B.Des.).”
Source: https;//fashionfad.in/designer-biogra-
phy/payal-kothari/
490 ‘The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains

Forensic Engineers investigate products, materials, structures and components that either fail or malfunction causing
loss to person(s) and property. They also handle vehicular or mechanical accidents. They also set down the
methodology involved to locate the cause(s) leading to such faults.
_ =
e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the
first year of their engineering undergraduate course.
Eligibility includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.
e Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course
fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions
under this scheme. *
e Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers
300 scholarships every year to eligible students.
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate = EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students gO nee
with physical disabilities, women and students from 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
North East and J&K." Chemistry, Mathematics)
+ National Scholarship Portal - Visit 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree in Forensic
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are Science/any stream of Engineering/
Central Government schemes offered by different Pharmacy/Computer Application/Mathematics/
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Dental Surgery or MBBS
Schemes.” OR
+ Scholarships are also available in institutes based on Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
merit” Master's in the same or related field
“Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been e”
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
+ Some States have student credit cards with low interest _
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. ee
+ All banks give education loans. eee
491

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Jamia Hamdard University, New Delhi
2. Mahatma Gandhi University, Kottayam, Kerala
3. University of Mumbai, Maharastra
4. Chandigarh University, Chandigarh
5. Sam Higginbottom University of Agriculture Technology and Sciences,
Allahabad, Uttar Pradesh
6. Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj Nagpur University, Nagpur, Maharasta
7. Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Bilaspur, Chhatisgarh
8. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad University of Technology, Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC
and AICTE before applying)
1. Kristu Jayanti College, Bangalore, Karnataka EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
2. Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka
3. JSS Academy of Higher Education & Research, Mysore,
Karnataka
4. Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat
5. Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh
6. Kalasalingam Academy of Research and Education,
Krishnankoil, Tamil Nadu
7. Karunya Institute of Technology and Sciences,
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
8. Rabindranath Tagore University, Bhopal, Madhyra Pradesh
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
492

GEO-INFORMATICS ENGINEER
Geo-Informatics engineering entails the development and use of information |
science infrastructure to address problems of Geography, Cartography, > 2
Geosciences and related branches of Science and Engineering. ; <>
~ or aw : v
a> —
TNs y -
e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the
first year of their engineering undergraduate course.
Eligibility includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.
¢ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000 =
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course EE
fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions ]. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
under this scheme. * Chemistry and Mathematics).
e Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers 2. Complete Bachelor's degree
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. (B.Sc./B.E./B.Tech.) in Geo-Informatics Engineering
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate OR
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students Complete Bachelor’s degree, followed by a
with physical disabilities, women and students from Master’s degree (M.Sc./M.E./M.Tech.) in the same
North East and J&K." field
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit OR
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are Pursue a diploma in Geo-Informatics.
Central Government schemes offered by different
piensa MEIC AICTE Sancmes Chtel Seite For admissions, you must qualify entrance
examination conducted at national level (JEE Main,
« Scholarships are also made available in institutes JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
Pased on merit EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
‘(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been Gr
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
« Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. os
« All banks give education loans. _
Pte ec ee ee am

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 77
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai, Maharashtra
2. Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi
3. Indian Institute of Technology, Bangalore, Karnataka
4. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal
5. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
6. Andhra University College of Engineering, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh
7. College of Engineering, Guindy, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying ) EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
1. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan
2. SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu
3. Symbiosis International University, Pune, Maharashtra
4. Manipal University, Jaipur, Rajasthan
5. Park College of Engineering and Technology,
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
6. University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, Uttrakhand
7. Amrita School of Engineering, Kerala
8. Asian International University, Imphal, Manipur
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
494

A Graphics Designer creates visual content or graphics to communicate messages with the help of advanced comput-
er software. A Graphics Designer creates the graphics primarily for published, printed, or electronic media, such as
brochures and advertising.
we <-.
PERSONALITY TRAITS yw. Mn.
- You are interested in artistic occupations — a &§ SS wees
« You are good with computers cn ——————SSSI
» You are comfortable working with teams a| G Oo
* You like to pay attention to details while working -. ~
C) v ) V e / \y
D {
= i
=)
SCHOLARSHIPS
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit Fees | COURSE FEE
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there | — =| The approx. course fee ranges between
are Central Government schemes offered by GY INR 30,000 — 19,41,000*
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
Bras Sabana” ‘These figures are estimated numbers and
will vary from Institute to Institute.
e Swami Vivekananda Merit Cum Means
Scholarship - Offered by the Government of West
Bengal, this scholarship provides financial support iB EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
to meritorious and economically disadvantaged AO vrecseereeererereseeseeretens
students pursuing higher education in various fields, 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream.
including graphic design. 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Des.) in
¢ Ishan Uday Scholarship for North Eastern Region Graphic Design/Web Design and any similar
- This scholarship aims to promote higher education discipline
among students from the North Eastern Region, OR
providing financial assistance for various Complete Bachelor’s degree (B.Des.) in Graphic
undergraduate courses, including design-related Design/Web Design and any similar discipline,
programs. followed by Master's degree (M.Des.) in the same
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes OR
beeedl em meth Complete a Bachelor’s degree (B.Des.) in any
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from time discipline, followed by a PG Diploma in Graphic
to time) Design.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
LOANS
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal
for students seeking education loan. This portal has EXPECTED INCOME
been developed under the guidance of the ‘The figures are indicative & subject to change.
Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Department of Higher Education (Ministry The approx. salary of a Graphics Presiginer
of Education) and Indian Banks Association (IBA). ranges between INR 12,083 - 35,000" per
- Some states have student credit cards with low Enentin @r Wishes
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Saugecs lijase/mameltensdloanealn/ Salen
Enel, CHE: ; . ries/graphic-designer-sala-
« All banks give education loans. ry-SRCH_KOO, 16.htm _

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?

Places of Work: Publishing Houses, Television Industry,

Design Group Centres, Advertising Industry, Game

Developing Companies, E-Commerce, News & EXPECTED GROWTH PATH yw

Magazines, Packaging Industries, Multimedia Companies, Junior Designer — Graphics Designer >

Ce Senior Graphics Designer

Entrepreneurship: You can also set up a private designing

company where you will cater to your client's needs.

Work Environment: You will typically work 5 to 6 days a

week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is applicable.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This course is offered by the Department of Design

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. National Institute of Design Ahmedabad, Gujarat

2. Potti Sreeramulu Telugu University, Hyderabad, Telangana

3. Tilak Maharashtra Vidyapeeth, Pune, Maharashtra

4. Rajasthan ILD Skills University, Jaipur, Rajasthan hi

5. Thunchath Ezhuthachan Malayalam University, Malappuram, Kerala yj

6. Potti Sreeramulu Telugu University, Hyderabad, Telangana — ae

PRIVATE INSTITUTES H iH d >.

(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited X

with UGC and AICTE before applying) 4 a

]. International School of Design, Pune, Maharashtra 7

2. Unitedworld Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, Gujarat EO OOO  Oe<S

3. Ajeenkya DY Patil University, Pune, Maharashtra

4. Apeejay Stya University, Sohna, Tamil Nadu

5. Arch Academy of Design, Jaipur, Rajasthan EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J

6. Auro University, Surat, Gujarat Sujata Keshavan is an Indian Graphic Designer who

7. DY Patil International University, is also the co-founder of Ray and Keshavan, a brand

Pimpri-Chinchwad, Maharashtra design firm based in India. Keshavan graduated

8. DY Patil University, Pune, Maharashtra from the National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad in
1984 and then pursued a Master of Fine Arts in

Information on the institute rankings can be found at - graphic design from the School of Art, Yale

hitps://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html University. In 2016, Keshavan co-founded Varana
Design Ltd., an artisanal luxury fashion brand, with
entrepreneurs Ravi Prasad and Meeta Malhotra.”
Source: https;//design.careers360.com/articles/-
most-popular-indian-graphic-designers
‘The above information is for training purposes only and will not

496 be used for any commercial gains

An Industrial Designer develops the concepts for manufactured products such as cars, home appliances, electronics,
and toys. By combining art, business, and engineering, they make products that people use every day.
Bar O @
PERSONALITY TRAITS WW. |
* You like to build things  &§
« You are interested in artistic occupations
« You are comfortable working in groups "
« You are good with computers 4
SCHOLARSHIPS >») \ #6
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit Lee
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there pW NS
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes” recs |] COURSE FEE
e IDC School of Design, IIT Bombay - Offers —Y The approx. course fee ranges between
scholarships for M.Des students amounting to Y INR 40,000 — 15,76,000*
~2,500 per month for 24 months, and for Ph.D. these f timated numb 4
students, 6,000 for the first two years and will vary from Ihctitute to, Ihefitute. “an
~6,400 thereafter.
e Avantika University Scholarships - Provides
various scholarships such as Ved Vyas Ez EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
Scholarship, Vikram Scholarship, and Arjun sassensassesecssneccesueecensasecsensssecsesusesesnnseatsnseceeassventennees
Scholarship for design students. 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream.
+ Scholarships are also available in the institutes 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Des.) in
i Industrial Design
based on merit OR
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Des.) in Industrial
time to time) Design followed by Master's degree (M.Des.) in
the same or related field.
LOANS Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of EXPECTED INCOME
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Gi The Romas ane inelisative®. subjacachanse
Finance), Department of Higher Education
(Ministry of Education) and Indian Banks The approx. salary of an Industrial
Association (IBA) Designer ranges between INR 20,000 -
- Some states have student credit cards with low 1,67,000° per month.
West B |, Odish
whet for instance, West Bengal, Ocisha, Source: https;//www.payscale.com/re- oe
—~ search/IN/Job=Industrial_Designer/Salary a
« All banks give education loans < ae. .
ce ee ee ee yo

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?

Places of Work: Testing Facilities, Design Centers, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH fp”

Clients' Exhibit Sites, Users' Homes or Workplaces,

Product Manufacturing Sites. Trainee Industrial Designer — Industrial
Designer — Senior Industrial Designer —

Entrepreneurship: You can also start a private firm. Design Lead

Work Environment: You will typically work 5 to 6 days

a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is

applicable.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This course is offered by the Department of Design.

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, Uttarakhand

2. Industrial Design Centre, Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai, Maharastra

3. National Institute of Design, Jorhat, Assam

4. National Institute of Design, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh

5. National Institute of Design, Kurukshetra, Haryana

6. National Institute of Design, Amaravati, Andhra Pradesh

7. National Institute of Technology, Rourkela, Odisha

8. Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj Nagpur University, Maharashtra

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited with

UGC and AICTE before applying)

1. Chandigarh University, Chandigarh

2.D J Academy of Design, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu

3. Nirma University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat

4. Priyadarshini Institute of Architecture and Design, Nagpur, Maharastra

5. Symbiosis Institute of Design, Pune, Maharastra

6. Terna Engineering college, Navi Mumbai, Maharastra

7. Unitedworld Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, Gurjarat

8. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD (J
Mann Singh is an Indian Product/Industrial
Designer and is also the Design Director of HOF,
an award winning Indian furniture brand. He has
completed his Bachelor’s in Design from the
National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad. Mann
Singh has won an Elle Decor International Design
Award in 2009 and again in 2010."
Source: https;//shop.hofindia.com/
mann-singh-collection-2
*The above information is for training purposes only and will

498 not be used for any commercial gains

An Industrial Engineer is concerned with increasing overall productivity of an industry. Industrial engineers develop in-
novative ways to improve the overall design and utility in the production process. They help in maintaining the optimum
utilization of resources.
\e)
cS
e
»
a =
P~&
|

¢ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -

This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first

year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility

includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the

Government of India for economically backward

students who have a strong aptitude for scientific

research.”

- Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000 EB EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY _

such engineering scholarships are awarded by the

Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees 1. Complete 10 + 2 in the science stream (Physics,

of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this Chemistry, Maths).

Salta, 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Tech./B.E.) in

+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The |OC Ltd offers Industrial Engineering/Manufacturing Engineering

300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students OR

need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The C lete Bachelor's d foll db

scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical omp © & Pachelors degree followed by a .

disabilities, women and students from North East and Master's degree (M.Tech/M.E.) in the same field

J&K." OR

+ Central Sector Scheme of Scholarships for College Completed 10th, Pursued Diploma in Engineering

and University Students - This scholarship is awarded to Lateral Entry in Second Year of B.E/B. Tech. (4 Year

the meritorious students from economically weaker Degree Course) in Industrial Engineering and

sections. Management based on Diploma certificate.

+ National Scholarship Portal -Visit Candidates having B. Sc. degree and also

www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are Mathematics as one of the subjects in 10+2 are

Central Government schemes offered by different also eligible

departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.* gins.

« Scholarships are also available in institutes based on For admissions, you must qualify entrance

meri examination conducted at national level (JEE Main,

“(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) JEE Advanced etc.) or State level (WBIJEE, AP

EAMCET etc.) or Institute level (VET, IP etc.)
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment

« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for

students seeking education loan. This portal has been

developed under the guidance of the Department of

Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Ministry of Ga

Education and Indian Banks Association (IBA). Students

can view, apply and track the education loan

applications on the website.

« Some states have student credit cards with low interest

rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.

+ All banks give education loans.

* | 499

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
~ ye SS.
g S&S SN a4
4 iO oS

This course is offered by the Department of Engineering. P “ a a)

This list of institutes is indicative only > 0 +e Bas <~ D > <
| D J\N-
i A\o. | hy <S

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES i] ST gy .S

1. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal ‘ Y y Sry es

2. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra u

3. Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Gujarat F a »

5. PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu Ww

6. Ramaiah Institute of Technology, Bangalore, Karnataka

7. Delhi Technological University, New Delhi

8. Indian Institute of Technology, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)

1. Satara Polytechnic, Jakatwadi, Maharashtra

2. Rashtreeya Vidyalaya College of Engineering (RVCE), Bangalore, Karnataka

3. Ramaiah Institute of Technology, Bangalore, Karnataka

4. Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat

5. JSS Academy of Technical Education, Bangalore, Karnataka

6. Manipal Institute Of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka

7. Vellore Institute Of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD (co)

8. Institute of Technology Management, Gwalior,

Madhya Pradesh
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https;//www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html!
500

An Instrumentation Engineer works in the field of designing, devel- {
oping, installing, managing equipment that are used to monitor
and control machinery
« [ a
— | =
¢ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the
first year of their engineering undergraduate course.
Eligibility includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.” =
e Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000 ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the . . .
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course 1. Complete 10+2 in Science stream (Physics,
fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions Chemistry and Mathematics).
under this scheme. * 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Tech/B.E.) in
¢ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers Instrumentation and Control Engineering
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. OR
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate Complete Diploma in Instrumentation and Control
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students Engineering.
with physical disabilities, women and students from
Newinisesieitel Hes Complete Bachelor's degree and follow it up with
e Central Sector Scheme of Scholarships for College a Master's degree in the same or allied fields.
and University Students - This scholarship is awarded
to the meritorious students from economically weaker For admissions, you must qualify entrance
sections. oer : .
: : 7 examination conducted at national level (JEE Main,
* National Scholarship Portal- Visit JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
www.scholarships.gov.in . Under this portal there are : 2 : ( '
Central Government schemes offered by different EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State . .
Seronneas” Please check the duration of the course during
: : . _. enrolment
¢ Scholarships are also available in the institutes
themselves based on merit.”
“(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Ministry of
Education and Indian Banks Association (IBA).
Students can view, apply and track the education loan
applications on the website.
« Some states have student credit cards with low interest _
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. e-
« All banks give education loans. ene nee
501

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
iL2
ES Sa
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering. “eg _
This list of institutes is indicative only Le
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad, Telanga
2. Government Polytechnic, Mumbai, Maharashtra
3. Ambedkar Institute of Technology, New Delhi
4. Central Institute of Technology, Kokrajhar, Assam |
5. Government Polytechnic, Ahmednagar, Maharastra
6. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal
7. National Institute of Technology, Trichy, Kerala
8. Government College of Engineering, Amravati, Maharastra
9. Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering and Technology, Longowal, Punjab
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala, Punjab
2. Calcutta Institute of Engineering and Management, Kolkata, West Bengal
3. Amity School of Engineering and Technology, Noida, Uttar Pradesh
4. Smt. Indira Gandhi College of Engineering, Mumbai
5. Vallurupalli Nageswara Rao Vignana Jyothi Institute, Hyderabad, Telangana
of Engineering and Technology, Hyderabad
6. St. Joseph’s College of Engineering, Chennai
7. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka
8. Hindusthan College of Engineering and Technology,
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
Information on institure rankings is available at - EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD (a3)
https;//www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html
502

A manufacturing engineer deals with the design and operation of computer networks, robots, automated machines,
machine tools, and material-handling equipment among others.
N | :
4
|
I ~~
Vv = y Q:. &
4 TW ls |
Q Aiiite NY
N '
ee | ,
| | 4
e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
e Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this © ccccssssssssssssssssssssssssssseesssssssssneesesssssnsnssnsesees
scheme. * . . .
e Indian Oil Educational Scholarship - The |OC Ltd offers I. Complete 1042 in the Science stream (Physics,
: . Chemistry, Mathematics).
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students ' ; .
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Tech/BE) In
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical Manufacturing Science and Engineering/Computer
disabilities, women and students from North East and Science/Electronics and Communication
J&K.* Engineering
e Central Sector Scheme of Scholarships for College OR
and University Students - This scholarship is awarded to Complete Diploma in Manufacturing Science and
the meritorious students from economically weaker Engineering
sections. OR
+ Visit www.scholarships.gov.in the National Scholarship Complete Bachelor's degree followed by Master's
Portal. Under this portal there are central government in the same or related field.
schemes offered by different departments, UGC/AICTE
Sen Tul Sele] USL SUT ule _ For admissions, you must qualify entrance
« Scholarships are made available by institutes examinations like JEE Mains/ JEE Advanced/
themselves based on merit; _ BITSAT/SRMJEE/KEAM/VITEEE/UPCET/UPCET/IPU
*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) CET
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
+ VidyaLakshmi, www. vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of el
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Ministry of
Education and Indian Banks Association (IBA). Students
can view, apply and track the education loan
applications on the website.
+ Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
+ All banks give education loans. se
eee ee © © © © © © we 503

WHERE WILL YOU WORK

This course is offered by the Department of Engineering.

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal

2. College Of Engineering, Anna University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

3. College of Engineering, Guindy, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

4. Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering and Technology,
Longowal, Punjab

5. Indian Institute of Information Technology, Design and Manufacturing,
Kancheepuram, Tamil Nadu

6. National Institute of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, Rachi,
Jharkhand

7. Government Polytechnic, Pune, Maharashtra

8. Government Tool Room & Training Centre, Bangalore, Karnataka

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66

AICTE before applying)

1. Birla Institute of Technology & Science, Pilani, Rajasthan

2. Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat

3. Vellore Institute of Technology (VIT), Vellore, Tamil Nadu

4. Acharya Institute of Technology, Bangalore, Karnataka

5. J.S.S. Academy of Technical Education, Noida,
Uttar Pradesh

6. PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu

7. Presidency University, Bengaluru, Karnataka

Information on the institute rankings can be found at -

https://www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html

504

A marine engineer is responsible for the operation, maintenance and repair of all major equipment onboard a ship. They
work with naval architects to design and build everything from small yachts and fishing boats to submarines and aircraft
carriers.
@ @9
@
° g 5
* OO Fie (5 he
“i @...
| —
ou ve ere CW Ye"
clk —— A
00 rele =
ol , A
+ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
h. =
— [=], EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
- Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000 QD vvvrssccesessersenensenssesseseesenseasessseseesenseneneeseseesensenenes
such engineering penile are te Ey le ; 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream
Ministry of Minority aM Every Yer. The ul course (Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics).
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this ; .
scheme." 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.E./B.Tech) in
_ : . Marine Engineering/Naval Architecture and Ship
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers Building/ Naval Architecture and Ocean
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students Enai :
: ngineering
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The OR
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical ,
disabilities, women and students from North East and Complete Bachelor $ degree, followed bya
IRK* Master's degree in the same field
- National Scholarship Portal - Visit OR ; .
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are Complete Bachelor s degree and pursue a Diploma
Central Government schemes offered by different in Marine Engineering.
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.”
+ Scholarships are also available in institutes based on For admissions, you must qualify entrance
wae examination conducted at national level (JEE Main,
Per : : : JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
*(Availability of these scholarsh from time to time a '
(Availabilty Olarships vary ) EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc,).
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
¢ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of ie"
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
« Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
- All banks give education loans.
e e e ° e e e ° e e e 505

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You are likely to work on all kinds of
ships such as ferries, cargo ships, and hovercrafts, cruise
liners, military vessels, submarines and so on. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ~
Trainee or Junior Engineer — Fifth Engineer
Work Environment: You will work in shifts, which are likely — Fourth Engineer — Third engineer >
to be of 8 to 12 hours, for 5 to 6 days per week. Second Engineer — Chief Engineer >
However, you have to remain alert throughout the day. ;
Your work may involve some amount of traveling. Technical lead — Technical Manager/
Superintendent
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Marine Engineering.
The list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. The Institutions of Engineers India, Kolkata, West Bengal
2. Marine Engineering and Research Institute, Kolkata, West Bengal
3. Indian Maritime University, Mumbai, Maharashtra
4. Indian Maritime University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
5. Indian Maritime University, Kolkata, West Bengal
6. Perunthalaivar Kamarajar Institute of Engineering and Technology,
Karaikal, Puducherry
7. |ndian Maritime University, Vishakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh
8. College of Engineering, Anna University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Vels University Chennai - Vel's Institute of Science
Technology and Advanced Studies, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. CV Raman Global University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
3. School of Engineering Cochin University of Science EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
and Technology, Kochi, Kerala
4. Sri Venkateswara College of Engineering, Sonali Banerjee is India’s first woman maritime
Sriperumbudur, Tamil Nadu engineer. She pursued a B.E. in Marine Engineering
5. Srinivas Institute of Technology, Mangalore, Karnataka at Kolkata’s Taratala-based Marine Engineering
6. Mohamed Sathak Engineering College, Kilakarai, Research Institute (MERI). She was later selected
Tamil Nadu by Mobil Shipping Co. for a gruelling six-month
7. Coimbatore Marine College, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu pre-sea course. This hands-on training took her to
8. Samundra Institute of Maritime Studies, Pune, Maharashtra ports in Singapore, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Hong Kong,
Fiji and Australia. On August 26, 2001, Sonali made
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - history when she boarded a Mobil Shipping Co.
https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html vessel and officially became the first Indian woman
to take charge of a ship's machine room.”
Source: https://www.thebetterin-
dia.com/157195/india-first-woman-mari-
time-officer-sonali-banerjee-news
“The above information is for training purposes only and will not
be used for any commercial gains.
506

Mechanical Engineers design, develop, build and test all sorts of mechanical devices, tools, engines
and machines in just about every type of industry.
4 4
e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship - Oo
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
¢ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About
20,000 such engineering scholarships are awarded by =
the Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course EB EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under 1. Complete 10+2 in Science stream (Physics,
this scheme. * Chemistry and Mathematics).
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd 2. Complete a Bachelor’s degree
offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible students. (B.Tech./B.Sc./B.E.) in Mechanical Engineering
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate OR
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students Complete a Bachelor's degree and pursue a
with physical disabilities, women and students from North Master’s degree (M.Tech./M.Sc./M.E.) in
East and J&K." Mechanical Engineering
Central Sector Scheme of Scholarships for College OR
and University Students - This scholarship is awarded to Completed 10th
the meritorious students from economically weaker Pursued Diploma in Mechanical Engineering
sections. Lateral Entry in Second Year of B.E/B. Tech. (4 Year
+ National Scholarship Portal - Visit Degree Course) in Mechanical Engineering based
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there are on Diploma certificate.
Central government schemes offered by different
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” For admissions, you must qualify entrance
+ Scholarships are also available in the institutes based examination conducted at national level (JEE Main,
on merit.” JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
Please check the duration of the course during
enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Ministry of Gi
Education and Indian Banks Association (IBA). Students
can view, apply and track the education loan
applications on the website.
- Some States have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
« All banks give education loans. _
* - 507

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH wy”
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Mechanical Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, Maharashtra
2. College of Engineering, Pune, Maharashtra
3. Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Varodara, Gujarat
4. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi
5. Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, Tamil Nadu
6. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal
7.LD College of Engineering, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
8. Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai, Maharashtra
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
]. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka
2. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu
3. SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
4. Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering, Bengaluru,
Karnataka
5. RV College of Engineering, Bengaluru, Karnataka
6. PSG College Of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
7. Ramaiah Institute of Technology, Bengaluru, Karnataka
8. BMS College of Engineering, Bengaluru, Karnataka
DISTANCE
Diploma in Mechanical Engineering (DME)
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https;//www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html
508

Metallurgical engineers are involved in the process of designing, creating or producing metals by various methods for
different applications. They separate metals from their ores and prepare them for use i.e. refining them to a pure state
and converting refined material into finished products. They are responsible for improving the quality of metal.
il 2 > :
poe :
pea | <>
T Pa a
_~ WK
a
K— re #8
~ QJ Go ° be <=
“le z
¢ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship - a =
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first \
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
e Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this
scheme. *
¢ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship - The IOC Ltd offers
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
disabilities, women and students from North East and sebscnsestusecsusessuescnssessusstnuestunsctinsssnsesanecensecensesene
J&K" 1. Complete 10+2 with Physics, Chemistry and
e Central Sector Scheme of Scholarships for College Mathematics.
and University Students - This scholarship is awarded to 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.E./B.Tech.) in
the meritorious students from economically weaker . .
: Metallurgy Engineering
sections. OR
+ Visit www.scholarships.gov.in the National Scholarship Complete Bachelor's degree (B.E,/B.Tech,) in
Portal. Under this portal there are central government Metall Enai . d 1
schemes offered by different departments, UGC/AICTE efallurgy Engineering an pursue Master s
Sahannes engl Sieve Schanes.” degree (M.E./M.Tech.) in the same discipline.
+ Scholarships are made available by institutes . .
haaaaiyas lnsaac| em mente” Please check the duration of the course during
“(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been Ga
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Ministry of
Education and Indian Banks Association (IBA). Students
can view, apply and track the education loan
applications on the website.
« Some states have student credit cards with low interest _
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. ee
+ All banks give education loans. -
eee ee ee ee ee ee 509

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH pr”
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only
la
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES 4)
1. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra *
2. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
3. Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi
A. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal
5. National Institute of Technology, Trichy, Kerala
6. National Institute of Technology, Surathkal, Karnataka
7. National Institute of Technology, Warangal, Telangana
8. Indian Institute of Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Mahatma Gandhi Institute of Technology (MGIT), Hyderabad, Telangana
2. School of Engineering and Technology, Jain University, Bangalore,
Karnataka
3. Birla Institute of Technology & Science, Pilani, Rajasthan
4. SRM University, Amaravati, Andhra Pradesh EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
5. Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh
6. School of Engineering, OP Jindal University, Raigarh,
Chhattisgarh
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https;///www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html
510

Mining Engineers apply their skill in Science and Technology to extract minerals from the earth. Mining Engineers
ensure safe and efficient development of mines and other surface and underground operations.
The role combines an understanding of the effects of these structures on their surrounding environment with technical
knowledge and management skills.
e g
F a
a 5 @

- Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship - = | J

This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first

year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility

includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the

Government of India for economically backward

students who have a strong aptitude for scientific

research.”

¢ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About

20,000 such engineering scholarships are awarded by

the Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course

fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under

this scheme. *

+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Lid =

offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Es EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY

Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate . . .

course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students I. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream with

with physical disabilities, women and students from North Physics, Chemistry and Maths. :

East and J&K." 2. Complete Bachelor's Degree (B.Tech./B.E.) in

: : _ Mining Engineering

- National Scholarship Portal - visit OR

www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are C lete Diol in Mining Enai .

central government schemes offered by different ompiete Lipioma in Mining Engineering.

departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” . :

. ’ : | For admissions, you must qualify entrance

« Scholarships are also available in the institutes based examination conducted at national level (JEE Main

enmeril JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBIJEE, AP

“(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).

Please check the duration of the course during enrolment

« VidyaLakshmi, www. vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for

students seeking education loan. This portal has been Ga

developed under the guidance of the Department of

Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of

Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian

Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and

track the education loan applications on the website.

+ Some states have student credit cards with low interest

rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.

+ All banks give education loans. oe

Dee eee ee ee SUL

WHERE WILL YOU WORK

This course is offered by the Department of Engineering.

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. IIEST, Shibpur, West Bengal

2. IIT, Kharagpur, West Bengal

3. VNIT, Nagpur, Maharashtra

4. University College of Engineering, Osmania University,
Hyderabad, Telangana

5. NIT, Surathkal, Karnataka

6. IIT, BHU, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh

7. NIT, Rourkela, Odisha

8. Savitribai Phule Pune University, Maharashtra

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD Gg

before applying)

1. ACE Angul - Adarsha College of Engineering, Angul, Odisha

2. Acharya Institute of Technology, Bangalore, Karnataka

3. Aditya Engineering College, Surampal, Andhra Pradesh

4. ACTS Satna - Aditya College of Technology and Science,
Satna, Madhya Pradesh

5. GATE Nalgonda - Gandhi Academy of Technical Education,
Nalgonda, Ramapuram, Telangana

6. GIET Rajahmundry - Godavari Institute of Engineering
and Technology, Rajahmundry, Andhra Pradesh

Information on institute rankings is available at -

www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html

512

A nanotechnology engineer designs, develops, and manipulates
materials and devices at the nanometer scale (one billionth of a @
meter) to create advanced technologies for applications in »»»)
medicine, electronics, energy, and more.
| Y
mB,
wb <a Ve 0)
wr §
Y ~ A
- Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
- Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About
20,000 such engineering scholarships are awarded by E
the Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course =O) EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
howto is directly paid to their institutions under 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
; . . ; Chemistry and Mathematics).
. yas poone sonal ue ve os 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Sc./B.Tech.) in
offers scholarships every year to eligible students. N ;
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate OR moloay/ Nanoscience
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students . .
with physical disabilities, women and students from North Complete Diploma in Nanotechnology/
East and J&K." Nanoscience
OR
¢ Central Sector Scheme of Scholarships for College . er .
and University Students - This scholarship is awarded to Any Graduation/ B. Tech/ B.Sc. in Microbiology/
the meritorious students from economically weaker Life Sciences/ Botany/ Zoology/ Food Science/
sections. Food Technology/ BE/ B. Pharma/ MBBS/ BDS/
. National Scholarship Portal -Visit BHMS/ BUMS/ BAMS or any other discipline.
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there are Diploma holders are eligible for our Executive
central government schemes offered by different Diploma, Industry Certificate, and Certificate
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” Programmes
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes based OR . .
en man" Complete Bachelor’s degree and follow it up with
1: Soar
*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) Master's in the same discipline.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been ‘e-
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Ministry of
Education and Indian Banks Association (IBA). Students
can view, apply and track the education loan
applications on the website.
- Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
+ All banks give education loans. ve
; 513

WHERE WILL YOU WORK

The course is offered by the Department of

Engineering/Nanoscience.

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

]. Allahabad State University, Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh

2. Chandigarh College of Technology, Chandigarh

3. CMJ University, Jorabat, Meghalaya

4. Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee University, Ranchi, Jharkhand

5. Institute of Good Manufacturing Practices India, New Delhi

6. University of Technology, Jaipur, Rajasthan

7. Yashwantrao Chavan Institute of Science, Satara,
Maharashtra

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC

and AICTE before applying)

1. SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu

2. School of Engineering, University of Petroleum and Energy
Studies, Dehradun, Uttarakhand EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66

3. Amity School of Engineering, Noida, Uttar Pradesh

4. National Institute of Medical Sciences (NIMS) University,
Jaipur, Rajasthan

5. Bharath Institute of Higher Education and Research,
Chennai, Tamil Nadu

6. Dr. Chandramohan Jha University (CMJ) University, Shillong,
Meghalaya

7. Bhagwant University, Aimer, Rajasthan

8. University of Technology, Jaipur, Rajasthan

9. India Education Centre (IEC) University - Baddi Campus,
Himachal Pradesh

Information on institute rankings is available at -

httos;//www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.htm!

514

Optical engineers make use of optics (study of behaviour of light) to design and build devices through the use of light
and optical technology. This requires them to understand and apply the science of light.
»
S Cie e
| >=

- Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
+ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About
20,000 such engineering scholarships are awarded by
the Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course
fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under
this scheme. *
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd
offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible students.
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate [=i EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on stucients cevssesusssnsssassusentsansssussuserenesuaeessesuneeseasecenssesnesses
with physical disabilities, women and students from North 1. Complete 10+2 in Science stream with Physics,
East and J&K.” Chemistry and Biology/Mathematics.

/ . .
+ National Scholarship Portal - Visit 2. Complete Bachelor 8 degree in Optical

. : : Instrumentation/Optics and
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there are . . .
. Optoelectronics/Aerospace Engineering/
central government schemes offered by different Avionics/Electroni d Electrical Enai . d
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” vionics/ ecrronics and Riecinical engineering an
any related field
« Scholarships are also available by the institutes based OR
on merit.” Complete Bachelor's degree, followed by Master's
‘(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) in the same or related field.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of 'e"|
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
+ Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
+ All banks give education loans. ve
e e e e e e e ° e e : 515

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH wy”
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by Department of Engineering/Physics.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
]. Jawaharlal Nehru Architecture and Fine Arts University, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Delhi College of Engineering, New Delhi
3. University of Delhi, New Delhi
A. Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala
5. Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi
6. National Institute of Technology, Hamirpur, Himachal Pradesh
7. Alagappa Chettiar College of Engineering and Technology, Sivaganga, Tamil Nadu
8. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal
9. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute Is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
]. Swarrnim Startup and Innovation University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat
2. PP Savani University, Surat, Gujarat
3. Mangalam School of Architecture and Planning, Kottayam, Kerala
4. BMS School of Architecture, Bangalore, Karnataka 66
5. SunRise University, Alwar, Rajasthan EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD
6. Smt Manoramabai Mundle College of Architecture, Nagpur,
Maharashtra
7. Anant National University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
8. Hindu College of Design, Architecture and Planning, Sonepat,
Haryana
Information on institute rankings is available at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
516

Petroleum Engineers help find oil and gas for the country's energy needs. Petroleum Engineers design and develop
methods for extracting oil and gas from deposits below the Earth's surface. Petroleum Engineers also find new ways to
extract oil and gas from older wells.
s vy
N
- Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.” [=4, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
: Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream.
20,000 such engineering scholarships are awarded by 2. Complete Bachelor's degree
the Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course (B.E,/B.Tech./B.Sc.) in Petroleum Engineerin
fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under ae ao g g
this scheme.” OR
’ ’ : : Complete Bachelor’s degree and follow it up with
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd Master's degree (M.E./M.Tech,/M.Sc.) in the same
offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible students. discipline
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students OR . . . .
with physical disabilities, women and students from North Complete Diploma in Petroleum Engineering and
East and J&K." follow it up with MLS. in Research Petroleum
’ / Refining and Petrochemicals.
¢ National Scholarship Portal - visit
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there are F dmissi ie
central government schemes offered by different oF aamissions, YOu must quali Y entrance .
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes’ examination conducted at national level ( JEE Main,
: : : _ JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
. Scholarships are also available in the institutes based EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.)
onmeri. conducted by respective state governments such
“(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) as WBJEE or AP EAMCET.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
¢ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of Gi
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
- Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
- All banks give education loans.
° 517

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ft”

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Chemical Engineering.
This list of institutes Is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Mugneeram Bangur Memorial University (MBM University), Jodhpur, Rajasthan
2. Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University College of Engineering, Kakinada, Andhra Pradesh
3. Alagappa College of Technology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
4. Zakir Husain College of Engineering and Technology Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh
5. Indian Institute of Petroleum and Energy, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh
6. Government Polytechnic College, Jodhpur, Rajasthan
7. Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Petroleum Technology, Amethi, Uttar Pradesh
8. Dibrugarh University Institute of Engineering and Technology, Dibrugarh, Assam
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Presidency University, Bangalore, Karnataka
2. School of Engineering, University of Petroleum and

Energy Studies, Dehradun, Uttarakhand EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
3. Manipal University, Jaipur, Rajasthan
4. MIT WPU Faculty of Engineering, Pune, Maharashtra
5. Koneru Lakshmaiah Education Foundation, Guntur,

Andhra Pradesh
6. Aditya Engineering College, Surampalem, Andhra Pradesh
7. National Institute of Medical Sciences (NIMS University),

Jaipur, Rajasthan
8. Institute of Technology and Management (ITM University)

Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh
Information on institute rankings is available at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)

518

A Pharmaceutical Engineer deals with the manufacture and production of a variety of drugs in a regulated
environment, with a particular emphasis on quality control. The primary goal of this field is to focus on medication,
including its planning, dosages, and side-effects. It encompasses various elements of biomedical engineering,
pharmaceutical engineering, and chemical engineering.
ag
J rl Ny y
s 1g ms
=© y l: >]
a i bd S 2
eee ee
Ly
+ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.
« Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000 =
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY _
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees ; ; :
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
scheme. * Chemistry and Mathematics/ Biology).
« Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers 2. Complete Bachelor s degree (B.Tech,/B.E.) in
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students Pharmaceutical Engineering
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The OR
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical Complete Bachelor's degree, followed by a
disabilities, women and students from North East and Master's degree (M.E./M.Tech) in the same
J&K." discipline.
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit _
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are For admissions, you must qualify entrance
Central Government schemes offered by different examination conducted at national level (JEE
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” Main, JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE,
+ Scholarships are also made available in institutes based AP EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
on merit.
a : : : Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
“(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)
* VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of Gi
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
+ Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. -
- All banks give education loans. e
ee © @ © © © © 8 8 8 8 519

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
4
The course is offered by the Department of
Pharmaceutical Engineering. o, f 4
This list of institutes is indicative only a ’ TT =O
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES a oe ; A
1. Indian Institute of Technology, Dhanbad, Jharkhand am . rE °
2. Indian Institute of Technology, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh = a —=
3. Dr Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University,
Aurangabad, Maharastra
4. Alagappa College of Technology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
5. Anna University, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu
6. Institute of chemical technology, Mumbai, Maharastra
7. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad University of Technology,
Kalyani, West Bengal
8. Andhra University, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES _ EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE
before applying )
1. University College of Science, Technology and
Agriculture, Kolkata, West Bengal
2. B.V. Raju Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, Telangana
3. Kakinada Institute of Technological Sciences,
Ramachandrapuram, Andhra Pradesh
4. PP Savani University, Surat, Gujarat
5. Hindusthan Institute of Technology, Coimbatore,
Tamil Nadu
6. Mahendra Engineering College, Namakkal, Tamil Nadu
7.K.S.Rangasamy College of Technology, Tiruchengode,
Chennai, Tamil Nadu
8. Dhanalakshmi Srinivasan Engineering College,
Perambalur, Tamil Nadu
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.himl
520

Printing Technology focuses on printing press operations, design, and production. Currently, it is non-impact and
primarily employs computers. It is a blend of scientific, technological, and creative abilities.
ia)
@
4“
@e a
¢ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship - \
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
« Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this
scheme. *
+ Indian Oil S2echorel Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers = EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students GD cicrssesteeeeetesteceeeneenmnnecesnsenstnssseeeenensnananensee
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
disabilities, women and students from North East and Chemistry and Mathematics).
J&K." 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Tech/B.E.) in
- National Scholarship Portal - Visit Printing Engineering.
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are . :
Central Government schemes offered by different For admissions, you must qualify entrance ;
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes” examination conducted at national level (JEE Main,
Scholarships are also made available in institutes based JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBIEE, AP
* pcnorarship ” EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
on merit
*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
¢ VidyaLakshmi, www. vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of eo;
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website
« Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. oe
+ All banks give education loans. _
rary

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
The course is offered by the Department of Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal
2. College of Engineering, Guindy, Tamil Nadu
3. Guru Jambheshwar University of Science and Technology, Hisar, Haryana
A. Institute of Printing Technology, Pune, Maharashtra
5. Government Institute of Printing Technology, Mumbai, Maharashtra
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka
2. Singhania University, Jhunjhunu, Rajasthan
3. PVG's College of Engineering and Technology and EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
GK Pate Wani Institute of Management,
Pune, Maharashtra
4. Avinashilingam Institute for Home Science and
Higher Education for Women, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
5. Calicut University Institute of Engineering
Technology, Malappuram, Kelara
6. Somany PG Institute of Technology and
Management, Rewari, Haryana
7. Raffles University, Neemrana, Rajasthan
8. llahia College of Engineering and Technology,
Muvattupuzha, Kerala
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
522

A Process Engineer is a professional who designs, implements and optimises industrial processes in the Manufacturing
industry. Process Engineer utilise their knowledge of Science to create materials that people can use every day.
Process Engineering covers a vast range of industries like petrochemical, agriculture, chemical, advanced material,
food, mineral processing, pharmaceuticals and so on.
| »
| | .

« Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -

This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first

year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility

includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the

Government of India for economically backward

students who have a strong aptitude for scientific

research.”

+ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000

such engineering scholarships are awarded by the

Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees

of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this

scheme. *

Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers Ez EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY |

300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students

need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science Stream (Physics,

scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical Chemistry and Maths)

disabilities, women and students from North East and y ;

JRK* 2. Complete Bachelor s degree (B.Tech/BE/B.Sc

¢ Central Sector Scheme of Scholarships for College B.Tech./B.E,/B.Sc.) in Process Engineering.

and University Students - This scholarship is awarded to — .

the meritorious students from economically weaker For admissions, you must qualify entrance

gacitens. examination conducted at national level ( JEE Main,

+ National Scholarship Portal - Visit JEE Advanced etc.) or State level (WBIEE, AP

www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are EAMCET etc.) or Institute level (VET, IP etc.)

Central Government schemes offered by different

departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.

¢ Scholarships are also available in institutes based on

merit.”

“(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)

« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for Gs

students seeking education loan. This portal has been

developed under the guidance of the Department of

Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Ministry of

Education and Indian Banks Association (IBA). Students

can view, apply and track the education loan

applications on the website.

- Some States have student credit cards with low interest oe

rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. ee

+ All banks give education loans. eee eet

Fete ee eee eee Be

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH yw”
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Computer Science and Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, Uttarakhand
2. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
3. National Institute of Technology, Trichy, Kerala
4. National Institute of Technology, Surathkal, Karnataka
5. Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology (MANIT), Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh
6. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra
7. Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi
8. Netaji Subhas University of Technology, New Delhi
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Birla Institute of Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani, Rajasthan
2. Institute of Technical Education and Research, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
3. The University of Petroleum & Energy Studies, Dehradun, Uttarakhand
4. Hindustan Institute of Technology and Science, Tamil Nadu
5. Karunya Institute of Technology and Sciences,
Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
6. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
7. Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering, Bengaluru,
Karnataka
8. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka
Information on the institute rankings can be found at
https;///www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
524

A Product Designer oversees the design process of a product from start to finish, or the improvement of an existing
product. A Product Designer is responsible for making regular usage products more appealing for the used by incor-
porating unique design elements to them.
* *
PERSONALITY TRAITS w. ™~ EE
« You like to assemble/build things oft q L > |
« You like to analyse problems/situations ‘ ~
« You pay attention to details while working Y
+ You like to have clear instructions to follow
Fee
SCHOLARSHIPS
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there “ “
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and B COURSE FEE
State Schemes.” —
Y The approx. course fee ranges between
e AICTE Pragati Scholarship for Girls - Offered by INR 30,000 - 9,20,000*.
the All India Council for Technical Education “These figures are estimated numbers and
(AICTE), this scholarship supports female students will vary from Institute to Institute.
pursuing technical degrees.
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes E EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
based on merit.” PD ss snesessneeseeesnenseeeeseeneeseeueenceseanensceeueeneeseeueeneeseaents
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream.
time to time) 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Des.) in Product
Design, followed by Master's degree (M.Des.) in
the same discipline
OR
LOANS Complete Bachelor's degree in any discipline
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a followed by Master’s degree (M.Des.) in Product
portal for students seeking education loan. This esign.
portal has been developed under the guidance of Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Department of Higher Education
(Ministry of Education) and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). EXPECTED INCOME
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change.
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, The approx. salary of a Product Designer
Bihar, etc. ranges between INR 25,000 - 1,67,000 “per
; ; month.
« All banks give education loans.
Source: hitps://www.payscale.com/re-
search/IN/Job=Product_Designer/Salary :
@ 55

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Manufacturing Companies, Design EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ~/
Consultancies.
Product Design Engineer/ Product
Entrepreneurship: You can also set up a private Designer > Product Design Manager
practise. — > Head of Product Design
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is
applicable.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Design.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. National Institute of Design (NID), Ahmedabad, Gujarat Ds y
2. National Institute of Design (NID), Gandhinagar, Gujarat 2) q s I
3. National Institute of Design (NID), Bangalore, Karnataka « F
4
4. National Institute of Design (NID), Kurukshetra, Haryana
5. National Institute of Design (NID), Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh
6. National Institute of Design (NID), Jorhat, Assam
7. National Institute of Design (NID), Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh [
8. Pandit Lakhmi Chand State University of Performing and Visual Arts,
Rohtak, Uttarakhand
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited with
UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Indian School of Design and Innovation (ISDI), EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD (ci)
Mumbai, Maharashtra Parth Parikh is a Product Designer who founded
2. MIT Institute of Design, Pune, Maharashtra Design Clinic India, interiors, furniture and light
3. Pearl Academy, New Delhi design company, in August 2015. Design Clinic
4. United World Institute of Design (UID), Ahmedabad, olfetotes ak elite dol tela hss CleTUunty Kea Cecclets ealey
. India. Parth has a Masters in product design from
Gujarat . , ; _
a ; ; Domus Academy, Milan. Parth’s design are inspired
5. Srishti Manipal Institute of Art, Design and Technology, by Indian heritage with a desire to make India’s
Bangalore, Karnataka design sensibilities and aesthetics global.”
6. Amity School of Design, Noida, Uttar Pradesh
7. Raffles Design Institute (RDI), Mumbai, Maharashtra Source: https,//www.newindianexpress.com/life-
8. Arch College of Design and Business, Jaipur, Rajasthan style/fashion/2017/mar/18/ when-in-
dia-plays-muse- 158215 1.html
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains
526

A Quality Assurance Engineer is responsible for the planning and executionof —__--
tests on all products and services developed by a company. In IT, a Quality We: SN
Assurance engineer finds and fixes bugs (or errors) ina product or program |
before its launch, working with developers to fix problems when necessary.
* ye _—s >
PERSONALITY TRAITS WW. ( )
« Analytical thinking e |
« Patience and persistence 1
« Strong communication skills :
- Effective time management
« Curiosity and continuous learning S iy
SCHOLARSHIPS | S (Soda
. Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt ? INR 43,000. 10,00,000" nges between
for engineering-specific scholarships such as . ;
IndusInd Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan These figures are estimated numbers and
: : will vary from Institute to Institute.
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on. [= EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
0 National Scholarship Portal = Please Nishi rOrrr eet rere rer rrrrerrrrerrirrrrerrertrrrrrerrirrriterrrrrirrrierriririy
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
are Central Government schemes offered by Chemistry and Mathematics).
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
State Schemes.” (B.Tech/B.Sc./BCA) in Computer
: : : ; Science/Information System
¢ Scholarships are also available in the Institutes OR
based on merit.” Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Master's degree (M.Tech/M.Sc./MCA) in the same
time to time) field
OR
Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
LOANS Master's degree (MBA/MS) in Information System.
OR
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Pursue a Postgraduate Diploma (PGDM) in
portal for students seeking education loan. This Information System.
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and FO
track the education loan applications on the
website | EXPECTED INCOME |
“The figures are indicative & subject to change.
« Some states have student credit cards with low .
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Ml e}e} 1 selemy ore Quali Assurense
Bihar etc. | Engineer ranges between INR 35,000 -
' ! 70,000* per month or more.
- All banks give education loans.
| Source - https://www.glassdoor.co.in/Sala-
| ries/qa-engineer-salary-SRCH_KOO, 1 1.htm
@ anne nena need . ea

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: Industries, including Automotive, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH Te
Medical Devices and Food/Beverage.
Quality Assurance Analyst/Engineer >
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to Senior Quality Assurance Analyst/
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is Engineer > Quality Assurance Lead
applicable.
Entrepreneurship: You can pursue freelancing in this
field.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Computer
Science.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics, Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU),
Statistics and Computer Science, Hyderabad, Telangana New Delhi
2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivakasi, Tamil Nadu
3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi
4. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences,
New Delhi
6. College of Applied Science (IHRD), Mavelikkara, Kerala
7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan
8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Annai College of Arts and Science, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu
2. AD Patel Institute of Technology, Anand, Gujarat
3. All India Institute of Management Studies,
Chennai, West Bengal
4. Acropolis Institute of Management Studies and 66
Research, Indore, Madhya Pradesh EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD
5. Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, Kolkata, Priya P Kulkarni is the Quality Engineer at American
West Bengal Express. She has a Bachelor's degree in Electrical,
6. Bangalore City College, Bangalore, Karnataka Electronics and Communications Engineering from
7. Bapatla Engineering College, Bapatla, Andhra Pradesh Vijayanagar Engineering college, after which she
8. Bonnie Foi College, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh has graduated from Aman PU College, in PCMCS.
9. Birla Institute of Technology & Science, Pilani, Rajasthan She has worked in companies such as Broadridge
10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka Financial Solutions Pvt Ltd, and IBM India Pvt Ltd.”
11. Vellore Institute of Technology (VIT), Vellore,
Tamil Nadu Source: sripriyapkulkarni.com/
12. Thapar Institute of Engineering & Technology,
Patiala, Punjab “The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains
Information on Institute rankings is available at -
https;///www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html
528

Railway Engineering deals with the design, construction, and operation of all types of rail transport systems. Railway
Engineering often includes other branches of Engineering such as Civil, Mechanical etc.
= \
S| |
2 —

+ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship - This
scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
+ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this © veessstemnecesestsssotesnnssensesstesennneseecenarenenenseeeese
SONeIIS. 1. Complete Class 10 + 2 in the Science stream
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers (Physics, Chemistry. Mathematics).
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Sc./B.Tech) in
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The Railway Engineering
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical OR
disabilities, women and students from North East and Complete a Diploma in Railway Engineering/Metro
J&K.* Rail Technology
+ Visit www.scholarships.gov.in the National Scholarship OR ;
Portal. Under this portal there are central government Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
schemes offered by different departments, UGC/AICTE Master's in the same or allied field.
Schemes and State Schemes.” to .

For a job in the railway sector, you have to clear
+ Scholarships are made available by institutes exams such as Railway Recruitment Board Senior
themselves based on merit.” Section Engineer & Junior Engineer (RRB SSE JE),
*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) Indian Engineering Services Examination (IES/ESE)

in addition to the general engineering exams such

as JEE (Main and Advanced).

Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of Ga
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
« Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. .
+ All banks give education loans. oe

Dee eee eet ee ee 529

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ~”
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY? ra ~
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only .
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES \
1. Indian Institute of Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, Jamalpur, ] ;
Bihar A = =_— §
2. Indian Railway Institute of Financial Management, Secunderabad,
Telangana i
3. Indian Railway Institute of Signal Engineering And es
Telecommunications, Secunderabad, Telangana
A. Indian Railways Institute of Civil Engineering, Pune, Maharashtra —
5. Indian Railways Institute of Electrical Engineering, Nasik, Maharashtra Q
6. Indian Railways Institute of Logistics & Materials Management,
New Delhi
7. Indian Railways Institute of Transport Management, Lucknow,
Uttar Pradesh
8.Indian Railways Track Machine Training Center, Allahabad, Uttar
Pradesh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC
and AICTE before applying) 66
1. Shri Vaishnav Vidyapeeth Vishwavidyalaya, ZONA Ae hs ALE
Indore, Madhya Pradesh
2. MIT College of Railway Engineering and Research,
Barshi, Maharashtra
3. Railway Academy, Vadodara, Gujarat
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https;///www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
DISTANCE LEARNING
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
530

Robotics Engineers are responsible for designing, constructing, application and operation of robots that can help and
assist humans. They also test the automated machines to ensure safety and also that they are economical to purchase.
Ly
y)
« Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
« Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this
scheme. * [=}, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers —
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students 1. Complete 10+2 in Science stream with Physics,
Scholarchp partulerly focueson students ih physical aM Me
scho i icu U U wi sica 1 .
disabilities, women ond students from North East and 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Tech,/B.E.) in
IK." aie Engineering
e Central Sector Scheme of Scholarships for College .
and University Students - This scholarship is awarded to Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Tech. B.E.) in
the meritorious students from economically weaker Mechanical Engineering and then do an M.Tech.
sections. in Robotics Engineering
¢ Visit www.scholarships.gov.in the National Scholarship OR
Portal. Under this portal there are central government Complete Diploma in Robotics Engineering.
schemes offered by different departments, UGC/AICTE
Schemes and State Schemes.” For admissions, you must qualify entrance
+ Scholarships are made available by institutes examination conducted at national level ( JEE Main,
themselves based on merit.” JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
‘(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
+ VidyaLakshmi, www. vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of Gq
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Ministry of
Education and Indian Banks Association (IBA). Students
can view, apply and track the education loan
applications on the website.
» Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. o
- All banks give education loans. _
eee ee ee we we ee ewe) 53]

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
(@)
The course is offered by the Department of Engineering. ad
This list of institutes is indicative only 4
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. University College of Engineering, Osmania University, \
Hyderabad, Telangana ( 4
2. Central Institute of Tool Design, Hyderabad, Telangana ys b A 4
3. Central Tool Room and Training Centre, Bhubaneswar, Odisha 4. - a ‘ bb
4. Khwaja Moinuddin Chishti Language University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh || AWA
5. College of Engineering, Vadakara, Kerala [ae hp \\! B
6. College of Engineering, Pathanapuram, Kerala Fat y Wy =
7. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh Se _|_ ee) _J}
8. Defence Institute of Advanced Technology, Pune, Maharashtra | : |
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2.PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
3. Lovely Professional University, Jalandhar, Punjab
4. Bharati Vidyapeeth Deemed University College of Engineering,
Pune, Maharashtra
5. School of Engineering and Technology,
Jain University, Bangalore, Karnataka
6. Bannari Amman Institute of Technology, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
Sathyamangalam, Tamil Nadu
7. Amrita School of Engineering, Coimbatore,
Tamil Nadu
532

A Sales Engineer has technical knowledge of the goods they are selling, as well as a good understanding of the
market. Nowadays, Sales Engineers act more like consultants. They help customers understand and suggest
scientifically and technologically advanced products and services, which can best solve their problems. Sometimes, a
Sales Engineer also undertakes market research to help make understand market demands.
° @ m= .
I
ml ®
_W
i
accel 4 :=
« Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
« Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this
scheme. *
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The |OC Ltd offers —
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY _
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
disabilities, women and students from North East and Chemistry and Mathematics).
J&K 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Tech./B.E.) in
- National Scholarship Portal - Visit Mechanical/Electrical Engineering
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are OR
Central Government schemes offered by different Complete Bachelor's degree and follow it up with
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” a Certificate Course in Marketing and Sales
« Scholarships are also available in institutes based on Management.
merit.”
nas : : . For admissions, you must qualify entrance
(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) examination conducted at national level (JEE Main,
JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
- VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for *Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of lo"
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
« Some States have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
- All banks give education loans. _—
° Gs

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ~”
OP tullil
TR®) Peel
—_
LT Oo |
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY? % Bg
Mi
Iv
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering. | Ciw
This list of institutes is indicative only. |
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES )
1. Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, Uttarakhand
2. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh - Se
3. National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu
4. National Institute of Technology Surathkal, Karnataka
5. Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology (MANIT), Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh
6. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra
7. Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi
8. Netaji Subhas University of Technology, New Delhi
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Academy of Business and Engineering Science Institute of Technology (ABESIT), Ghazabad
2. Ajay Binay Institute of Technology, Cuttack, Odisha
3. Adarsha College of Engineering, Angul, Odisha
4. Aurangabad College of Engineering, Aurangabad, Maharashtra 66
5. Rajachani Institute of Science and Technology, Palakkad, Kerala 2Csole Ta ateha ial AY
6. Annapoorana Engineering College, Salem, Tamil Nadu
7. Arya College of Engineering and IT, Jaipur, Rajasthan
8. Aravali College of Engineering and Management, Faridabad,
Haryana
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
534

Smart manufacturing (SM) is a technology-driven approach that utilizes Internet-connected machinery to monitor the
production process. The goal of SM is to identify opportunities for automating operations and use data analytics to
improve manufacturing performance. It optimizes manufacturing procedures through automation, big data analytics
and computerized controls that minimize costs and maximize productivity.

e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -

This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first

year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility

includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the

Government of India for economically backward

students who have a strong aptitude for scientific

research.”

¢ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About

20,000 such engineering scholarships are awarded by

the Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course

fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under

this scheme.”

- Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Lid ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY _

offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible students.

Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,

course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students Maths and Chemistry).

with physical disabilities, women and students from North 2. Complete Bachelor's (B.Tech/B.E.) in Smart

East and J&K. : : . .

Manufacturing and Automation Engineering

e Central Sector Scheme of Scholarships for College OR

and University Students - This scholarship is awarded to C lete Bacleor's d d follow it ith

the meritorious students from economically weaker omplete ac eors egree ane ° ow rep wi

sections. (M.Tech./M.E.) in the same discipline.

- National Scholarship Portal - Visit a .

www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there are For admission, you must qualify for one of the

Central government schemes offered by different following entrance exams - JEE Mains, TNEA, MET,

departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” KCET, VITEE, etc. which are conducted on the

+ Scholarships are also available in the institutes based national, state or university level.

on merit.”

"(Availa bility of these scholarships vary from time to time) Please check the duration of the course during enrolment

« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for Ga

students seeking education loan. This portal has been

developed under the guidance of the Department of

Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Ministry of

Education and Indian Banks Association (IBA). Students

can view, apply and track the education loan

applications on the website.

- Some states have student credit cards with low interest ce

rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. eo

+ All banks give education loans. _

a eres °)°))

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Netaji Subhas University of Technology, New Delhi
2. University of Delhi, New Delhi
3. Sant Longowal Institute of Engineering and Technology, Longowal, Punjab
A. Indian Institute of Information Technology, Design and Manufacturing, Kancheepuram, Tamil Nadu
5. Indian Institute of Information Technology, Design and Manufacturing, Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh
6. Visvesvaraya Technological University, Bangalore, Karnataka
7. Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University, Dwarka, New Delhi
8. Gandhi Institute of Engineering and Technology (GIET University), Gunupur, Odisha
9. Defence Institute of Advanced Technology, Pune, Maharashtra
10. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with 46
UGC and AICTE before applying ) EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD
1. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan
2. Jaipur Engineering College, Jaipur, Rajasthan
3. Tamil Nadu College of Engineering, Karumathampatti, Tamil Nadu
4. University of Petroleum & Energy Studies, Dehradun, Uttarakhand
5. Hindustan Institute Of Technology And Science, Kelambakkam,
Tamil Nadu
6. Lovely Professional University, Phagwara, Punjab
7. Bharati Vidyapeeth Deemed University, Pune, Maharashtra
8. Jain University, Bangalore, Karnataka
9. The Neotia University, Kolkata, West Bengal
Information on institute ranking is avaialble at -
https;//www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html
536

A sound engineer is responsible for the technical side of a recording or live performance. A sound engineer designs
and manages sound levels and quality of output. They are also responsible for maintaining the physical sound equip-
ment, like speakers, mixing consoles, and microphones. A sound engineer might review recorded tracks and edit them
to improve them.
0
Q KZ
A ee
| ol AF
(2) (A oS oe
Dae
o> Oe |
X >
AQ oS.
e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
e Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the =
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees ES EDUCATIONAL P ATHWAY
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this
scheme. * ]. Complete your class 10 + 2 in the Science
* Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers stream (Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics).
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Sound
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The Engineering/Acoustics Engineering/ Sound and
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical Music Technology
disabilities, women and students from North East and OR
J&K." Complete Diploma in Sound/Audio
+ Visit www. scholarships.gov.in the National Scholarship Engineering/Audio and Music
Portal. Under this portal there are central government Production/Acoustics/ Music Technology/ Sound
schemes offered by different departments, UGC/AICTE Production/ Electronic Music Production/ Sound
Schemes and State Schemes." Design or similar fields.
¢ Scholarships are made available by institutes :
themselves based on merit.” For admissions, you must qualify entrance
i . . . examination conducted at national level (JEE Main
ele) ’
(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of Gi
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
- Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. _
« All banks give education loans. _
rrr

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Le
"ff
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering. \ y
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. College of Applied Science Vadakkencherry, Palakka, Kerala
2. Government Film & Television Institute, Bangalore, Karnataka oo
3. University of Mumbai, Mumbai, Maharashtra a)
A. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal
5. Film and Television Institute of India, Pune, Maharashtra
6. Sri Aurobindo Centre for Arts and Communication, New Delhi
7. Sri Annamacharya Government College of Music & Dance,
Hyderabad, Telangana
8. Satyajit Ray Film and Television Institute, Kolkata, West Bengal
ap
PRIVATE INSTITUTES ©
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. SAGE University, Indore, Madhya Pradesh
2. Risali Institute of Management, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh
3. Garden City University, Bangaluru, Karnataka
4. CMR University (School of Science Studies), Bangaluru, Karnataka
5. Seamedu School of Pro-Expressionism, Pune, Maharashtra
6. Deviprasad Goenka Management College of
Media Studies, Mumbai, Maharashtra
7. Rayat Bahra University, Mohali, Punjab EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 6
8. Angel's Music Academy, Jaipur, Rajasthan
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
www. nirtindia.org/2023/Ranking. html
538

Textile Engineers use their knowledge of Science and Engineering tehniques to create fabric, yarn and fiber. They
design machinery involved in the production of textile fiber. They are also responsible for designing and controlling
textile processes.
\ as | ee
a= SN <<
i Ff
« Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.
¢ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this © —
scheme." 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers (Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics).
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.E./B.Tech)
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The in Textile Engineering/Textile Technology
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical OR
disabilities, women and students from North East and Complete Bachelor's degree, followed by a
* /
JK Master's degree (M.E./M.Tech) in the same
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit discipline
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are OR
Central Government schemes offered by different For admissions, you must qualify entrance
* ,
copelnunstais, USC CT 2 Seliomics eliel Sisto Sarees, examination conducted at national level (JEE Main,
« Scholarships are also available in institutes based on JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
merit.” EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
‘(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been Ga
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
« Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. oe
« All banks give education loans. : :
Dee eee 6 589

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
The course is offered by the Department of Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Varodara, Gujarat
2. The Institutions of Engineers India, Kolkata, West Bengal
3. Odisha University of Technology and Research, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
4. Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Kakinada, Andhra Pradesh
5. Himachal Pradesh Technical University, Sasan, Himachal Pradesh
6. Maharaja Ranjit Singh Punjab Technical University, Bathinda, Punjab
7. Jawaharlal Nehru Government Engineering College, Sundernagar,
Himachal Pradesh
8. Rajasthan Technical University, Kota, Rajasthan
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying )
1. Om Parkash Jogender Singh University (OPJS University),
Rajgarh, Rajasthan
2. DKTE Society's Textile and Engineering Institute, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
Ichalkaranji, Maharashtra
3. Shri Vaishnav Vidyapeeth Vishwavidyalaya,
Indore, Madhya Pradesh
4. PSG Institute of Advanced Studies, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
5. Panipat Institute of Engineering and Technology,
Samalkha, Haryana
6. Jawaharlal Darda Institute of Engineering and
Technology, Yavatmal, Maharashtra
7. UP Textile Technology Institute, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
8. PK University, Shivpuri, Madhya Pradesh
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
540 ~ https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html

A Tool Engineer deals with the manufacturing and designing of electronic and technical tools. The work comprises
designing tools, designing advanced tools and also bringing a variation to the existing tools to hasten and make the
g gning « ging g
work easy. The work also includes the creation of die-cast designs, fixtures, designing jigs, and plastic moulds. It
: Me q gns, 7 gNing |Igs, p
requires being well versed in metrology and measurements.
“1
= = r |
= };
« Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
=! EDUCATIONAL PAT
« Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000 = EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees 1. Complete your 10+2 in Sceince (Physics,
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this Chemistry and Mathematics).
scheme. 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Tech./B.E.) in
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers Tool Engineering
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students OR
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The . . . . .
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical Complete a Diploma in Tool Engineering/BVoc in
disabilities, women and students from North East and Tool Engineering
J&K.* OR
Central Sector Scheme of Scholarships for College Complete Bachelor's and then follow it up with
and University Students - This scholarship is awarded to Master's (M Tech/ME) in Tool Engineering.
the meritorious students from economically weaker
tions. oo. .
“<< a Soy . For admissions, you must qualify entrance
oNeittermell Seinehersa Lnsiarel = MS examination conducted at national level (IEE Main
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are '
Central Government schemes offered by different JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
on fotchies aio cllso eviellelshe Ii IMs tits Besael em Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)
+ VidyaLakshmi, www. vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for 7
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Ministry of
Education and Indian Banks Association (IBA). Students
can view, apply and track the education loan
applications on the website.
« Some States have student credit cards with low interest _*
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. .
+ All banks give education loans. se
ee

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You can work in Automobile industry,
Manufacturing and Technology companies.
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH I”
Work Environment: You will typically complete your Tool Engineer — Manufacturing Engineer —
design work in office environments, plants, or factories. You Senior Manufacturing Eni
might have to travel to manufacturing plants and factories entor Manutacturing Engineer
to gather information and liaise with the manufacturing and OR
design team. Tool Engineer — Design Engineer >
Manager, Design Engineering
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
a
This course is offered as a part of Mechanical | _) @: =
Engineering Department in certain institutes. ¢ a VY
This list of institutes is indicative only. sess os
une ee
HH | si ire
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES ‘a t 1
1. Indo German Tool Room, Aurangabad, Maharashtra i >
2. Institute of Engineering and Rural Technology, Allahabad = - .
s a
Uttar Pradesh Y SS yS an a X,
3. Central Institute of Tool Design, Hyderabad, Telangana , Ad e ~
A. Delhi Institute of Tool Engineering, New Delhi C : ;
yp ype |
5. Shri Vishwakarma Skill University, Palwal, Haryana
6. Punjab Technical University, Kapurtala, Punjab
7. Government CPC Polytechnic, Mysore, Karnataka
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
AICTE before applying )
1. Murugappa Polytechnic College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu PV Rajalakshmi is the first woman Tool and Die
2. St. Soldier Institute of Engineering and Technology, Pile latest Sieh Sil ney (Ans Cl engineering
; services in Bangalore, called Mantra Leistung
Jalandhar, Punjab where training is imparted in design and
3. RV College of Engineering, Bengaluru, Karnataka manufacturing. It also organises skill development
4. Thapar Institute of Engineering And Technology, Patiala, programmes for individuals and industries. She :
. completed her Diploma in Tool and Die Making in
Punjab 1982 from NTIF, Kerala; then worked for 5 years in
5. GLA University, Mathura, Uttar Pradesh NTTF, Bengaluru for industrial training. After gaining
6. KMCT Polytechnic College, Kozhikode, Kerala some experience, she started her own training
. . institute to help employees across different
doi SMa Reiyicentate Celloete, [Xedall el, Neils industries by training them according to industry
8. Chandigarh Polytechnic College, Mohali, Punjab requirements.”
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - Source: https;//www.nttfirg.com/about-us/alumni
https;//www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html /p-v-rajalakshmi
*The above information is for training purposes only and will not
be used for any commercial gains
542

Water Resources Engineers develop and execute plans for developing water systems that provide clean, safe water
in an efficient way that is also good for the planet. They try to effectively distribute water across several construction
projects throughout the city. They prepare new designs and strategies to conserve more water and energy overall.
2
~e j
eee 7
“Sak a ~
e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
¢ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About =
20,000 such engineering scholarships are awarded by EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
the Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course levsesersonsesssatsesnssuteesusanuctesassueceeeaenesuesuesnecseenees
he, . CUSETE.SES is directly paid to their institutions under 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
ie Chemistry and Mathematics).
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Lid 2. Complete Bachelor’s degree
offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible students. (B.Tech./B.E./B.Sc.) in Water Resource Engineering
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate OR
course. The scholarship DELHSUE MESSENGERS Complete Bachelor's degree and follow it up with
with physical disabilities, women and students from North M s (M.Tech./M.E./M.Sc.) in th
East and J&K." laster's (M.Tech./M.E./M.Sc.) in the same
' discipline
+ National Scholarship Portal - Visit OR
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are Complete Bachelor's degree(B.Tech./B.E./B.Sc. in
Central government schemes offered by different _ . : ;
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” Civil Engineering followed by a Master's degree
: : ’ |. (M.Tech/M.E./M.Sc.) in Water Resource
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes based Engineering
on merit.” .
*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) For admissions, you must qualify entrance
examination conducted at national level EE Main,
JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).
¢ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and Gi
track the education loan applications on the website.
« Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
« All banks give education loans.
°° 543

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Kakinada, Andhra Pradesh
2. Krishna University, Andhra Pradesh
3. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
A. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra
5. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal
6. Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi
7. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
8. National Institute of Technology, Trichy, Kerala
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying )
1. Bir Tikendrajit University, Imphal, Manipur
2. All India Institute of Diabetes and Research, Naranpura, Gujarat
3. Krea University, Sricity, Andhra Pradesh
A. Koneru Lakshmaiah Education Foundation University,
Guntur, Andhra Pradesh
5. Hindustan Institute of Technology and Science,
Chennai, Tamil Nadu
6. Angadi Institute of Technology and Management, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
Savagaon, Karnataka
7. Bheemanna Khandre Institute of Technology, Bhalki,
Karnataka
8. Royal School of Engineering and Technology, Guwahati,
Assam
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
544

Government 4

an (= Sd
7
A744
6 FLEA - SY
© cs ch)
: ©
DZ
Boy al
oa
Be.
Jes
Tk,
cr ~?
af S/S)». %

Under the Agnipath scheme, people between the ages of 17 years and 23 years will be recruited into the military
service of their choice for four years. After this tenure, 25% of the Agniveers will be retained and the remaining 75%
will be permitted to return to civilian life. During this duration of 4 years, they would gain many skills which will help
them to gain employment.
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’.
¢ Scholarships are also available in the institutes
based on merit’.
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from
time to time)
[=}, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a ;
portal for students seeking education loan. This » Class 10th or 12th pass, depending on the role.
portal has been developed under the guidance of Selection Process
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of . . . .
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks * Physical Fitness Test (PFT): Running, push-ups, sit-ups,
Association (IBA) and other physical benchmarks.
S tesh tudent credit cards with | e Medical Examination: Ensures physical and medical
+ Some states have student credit cards with low Fitness.
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, .
H . ritren Exam: based on general Knowle e,
Bihar. etc. Written Exam: Based on general knowledg
‘ . . mathematics, reasoning, and basic science (varying
+ All banks give education loans. by entry category).
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.

Where will you work?
Places of Work : You will be placed under the Indian yp
Navy, Indian Army, Indian Air Force as a non-commissioned EXPECTED GROWTH PATH
CHIE Private — Corporal — Sergeant —
Work Environment : The work timings are typically 6 to 7 Sergeant Major
days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is OR
applicable. You are expected to deal with challenging Seaman — Leading Seaman — Petty
situations. Most of the work is outdoors. Officer — Chief Petty Officer
OR
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. Aircraftman — Leading Aircraftman — Sergeant
— Warrant Officer
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Ministry of Defence Training Centers, Multiple locations in India
2. Maharashtra Institute of Defence Studies and Analysis (MIDSA), Pune, Maharashtra
3. Uttar Pradesh Sainik Academy, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
4. Sainik School, Ghorakhal, Nainital, Uttarakhand
5. Rashtriya Military School, Bengaluru, Karnataka
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
1. Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), Mumbai, Maharashtra
2. Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh, and campuses in Jaipur and Gurugram
3. NIIT Foundation, Gurugram, Haryana, centers nationwide
4. Minerva Academy, Mohali, Punjab
5. International College for Security Studies (ICSS), New Delhi
|
i; -
r~ \ mB (— 4
<= A |
| w& X \ — y 4 r]
> | ~
} >, YY
| ant
|
548

The Border Security Force (BSF) is India's border guarding organisation which is known as the Ist line of
defence and also one of the seven Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF) of India. A BSF Jawan is responsible for
promoting a sense of security among the people living in the border areas punjab and rajasthan border as well as
preventing trans-border crimes such as smuggling and unauthorised entry into or exit from the territory of India.
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’.
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes
based on merit’. =
UAvailebi . [=|, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
(Availability of these scholarships can vary from [OnE SE
UME TOUS) « Complete Class 10 or 10+2 in any stream. Pursue
short-term certificate courses in leadership, physical
fitness, or disaster management offered by vocational
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a training centers, private institutes, or government-run
portal for students seeking education loan. This skill development programmes.
portal has been developed under the guidance of - Diploma in Defence Studies, Border Security, or
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Security Management, offered by vocational institutes
finance) wns of Education and Indian Banks and defense training academies.
ssaciciitem (LEY. ; « Bachelor's degree in Defence Studies, Security
+ Some states have student credit cards with low Management, or Public Administration, offered by
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, universities and defense-related institutes.
Bihar, etc. « Master’s in Defence Studies, National Security, or
+ All banks give education loans. Strategic Studies, focusing on advanced knowledge in
defense operations, security analysis, and leadership.
« Competitive Exams: To become a BSF Officer,
candidates must clear exams conducted by the Staff
efit. wr Selection Commission (SSC) or Union Public Service
an Commission (UPSC) for positions like Assistant
Banm /- ou Commandant.
pwy oT pg & ae Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
LZ NS y
anu © — a / Gi
o c Ci y,
Cm ay “qh
4 3 5 yy
4 5 4 =
tn = \
J :
a 4A
549

Where will you work?
Places of Work : You can find employment in any of the py
192 battalions as well as in the specialised units such as EXPECTED GROWTH PATH
the marine wing, air wing and artillery regiment. Assistant Commandant > Deputy Commandant
Work Environment : The work timings are typically 6 to 7 — Commandant — Deputy
days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is Inspector General (DIG) — Inspector
applicable. You are expected to deal with challenging General (IG) — Additional Director
situations. Most of the work is outdoors. General (ADG) — Special Director
General — Director General (DG)
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
Complete your Bachelor's degree from any recognised institution in India which offers the
course required and check for UGC accreditation.
This list of institutes is indicative only
BSF INSTITUTES
1. BSF Academy, Tekanpur, Indore, Madhya Pradesh
2. Central School of Weapon and Tactics (CSWT), Indore, Madhya Pradesh
3. Training Centre and School (TC&S), Hazaribagh, Jharkhand
4. BSF Institute of Communications and Information Technology (BICIT), New Delhi
5. Centre for Electronics and Digital Communication (CEDCO), Bengaluru, Karnataka
1
/ 1
of t]
‘ /
¢ 7
ay
e: EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Ts, Tanushree Pareek - India's first woman combat
officer at BSF since its inclusion of women among their
ranks at 2013, Tanushree Pareek also held the
distinction of leading the Independence day Parade
at the Sher-e-Kashmir cricket stadium in Srinagar on
15th August, 2019."
a \B Source: https;//www.indianyouth.net/bsfs-first
3 - -woman-combat-officer-tanushree-pareek-in-
spires-youth/
‘The above information is for training purposes only and will not
be used for any commercial gains.
550

Central Industrial Security Force (or CISF) is another wing of the central armed police force and is the
largest industrial security force. The primary objective of a CISF officer is to provide industrial units such
as atomic power plants as well as other important areas for the Indian economy with military grade
security and round the clock protection.
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’.
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes
based on merit’.
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from =
inom te Fe, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
¢ Complete Class 10 or 12 in any stream. Pursue
; ; . _ .. short-term certificate courses in leadership, physical
> VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, ee fitness, or disaster management offered by vocational
portal for students seeking education loan. This training centers or private institutes.
portal has been developed under the guidance of Dj . . .
. : . . + Diploma in Defence Studies, Security Management, or
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of :
. _ ; 4 Public Safety. These programmes are offered by
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks . or . f .
me! vocational institutes and provide basic knowledge in
Association (IBA). . .
; security operations, management, and defense
« Some states have student credit cards with low strategies.
Sher Meliss, Vor Meno, Wes! Fengell, clbine| + Bachelor’s Degree in Defence Studies, Security
har, efc. Management, or Public Administration.
» All banks give education loans. « Master's Degree in Defence Studies, National Security,
or Strategic Studies.
« To become a CISF Officer, candidates must clear
exams conducted by the Staff Selection Commission
(SSC) or Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) for
positions like Assistant Commandant.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
ao 551

Where will you work?

Places of Work : You can find employment in any one of py

the 9 sectors (Airport, North, North-East, East, West, South, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH

Training, South-East, Central) also as well as a fire wing. Assistant Commandant — Deputy

Work Environment: The work timings are typically 6 to 7 Commandant —> Commandant — Deputy

days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is Inspector General (DIG) >

applicable. You are expected to deal with challenging Inspector General (IG) — Additional

situations. Most of the work is outdoors. Director General (ADG) —> Special

Director

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field. General — Director General (DG)

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. National Defence Academy (NDA), Pune, Maharashtra

2. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy (SVPNPA), Hyderabad, Telangana

3. Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF) Academy, Gujarat

4. Police Training Colleges in various states (offer related training programmes in security management

and law enforcement)

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

1. Institute of Security and Safety Management (ISSM), New Delhi

2. Indian School of Security and Safety (ISSS), Mumbai, Maharashtra

3. Vishwas Training Academy, Pune, Maharashtra

A <b), q EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J

_ Ss Rashmi Bedwal - Breaking free from the gender
ceiling, Reshmi Bedwal is the Deputy Commandant of
CISF and supervises the security at Karnataka's
| Kempegowda International Airport (KIA) terminal. She
S cleared the UPSC Central Armed Police Forces
(CAPF) Assistant Commandant exams in 2013 and
went on to make a mark in a male-dominated field.”
Source: https;//thelogicalindian.com/tags/Rash-
mi-Bedwal
“The above information is for training purposes only and will not be
552 used for any commercial gains.

The Indian Coast Guard (ICG) is a maritime armed force operating under the Ministry of Defence. The ICG is
responsible for protecting the maritime and other national interests of India in the maritime zones. They provide
protection to offshore and other structures. They also provide protection to fishermen and assist in anti smuggling
operations.

¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’.

« Scholarships are also available in the institutes

d it. =

_ Dasecion mer [=), EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY

(Availability of these scholarships can vary from OD ircecccsscssesesesseeeeseneees

WME HORE) « Complete Class 10 or Class 12 in any stream (Science

or Commerce preferred). Pursue short-term certificate
courses in marine safety, firefighting, or lifesaving

+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a operations offered by maritime institutes or vocational
portal for students seeking education loan. This training centers.
portal has been developed under the guidance of + Diploma in Nautical Science, Marine Engineering, or
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Marine Technology. Offered by various maritime
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks training academies and provides a foundation in
Association (IBA). marine operations, navigation, and ship handling.

» Some states have student credit cards with low » Bachelor of Science in Nautical Science (B.Sc.
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Nautical Science) or Bachelor of Engineering (B.E.) in
Bihar, etc. Marine Engineering.

- All banks give education loans. + Master’s Degree in Marine Engineering, Maritime

Safety, or Defence Studies.
* To become a Coast Guard Officer, candidates must
~~ clear the Indian Coast Guard exams. The selection
7 process includes written tests, physical fitness
‘| <r assessments, and interviews, covering topics like
os i navigation, ship operations, and safety protocols.
Poo | il a Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
Se FAce | Se!
es al —_
a
“Cire & eee
I a. S
553

Where will you work?
Places of Work : You will be hired by the Indian Coast EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
Guards, Government of India. Assistant Commandant — Deputy
Work Environment : The work timings are typically 6 to 7 Commandant — Commandant (JG) —
days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is Commandant — Deputy Inspector General —
applicable. You are expected to deal with challenging Inspector General — Additional Director
situations. Most of the work is outdoors. on — Director General
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field. Yantrik — Uttam Yantrik — Pradhan
Yantrik — Sahayak Engineer > Uttam Sahayak
Engineer — Pradhan Sahayak Engineer
OR
Navik — Uttam Navik — Pradhan Navik —
Adhikari — Uttam Adhikari —
Pradhan Adhikari
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Coast Guard Academy, Ezhimala, Kerala
2. National Defence Academy (NDA), Pune, Maharashtra
3. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy (SVPNPA), Hyderabad, Telangana
4. Indian Naval Academy (INA), Ezhimala, Kerala
5. Marine Engineering Research Institute (MERI), Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
1. Samundra Institute of Maritime Studies, Mumbai, Maharashtra
2. International Maritime Academy, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
3. TMI Academy of Marine Studies, Mumbai, Maharashtra
4. Tolani Maritime Institute, Pune, Maharashtra
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Nupur Kulshrestha was the first woman to be
promoted as DIG of Indian Coast Guard. She has
been in service for over 23 years. Kulshrestha feels
Ad her example would pave the way for other Indian
° women to follow in her footsteps”
e Source: hittps;//www.shethepeople.tv/top-stories/in-
° spiration/nupur-kulshrestha-dig-
of-indian-coast-guard/
> *The above information is for training purposes only and will not be
554 used for any commercial gains.
a

The main role of a CRPF officer is to enable the Central Government to maintain law, order and internal security by
performing actions such as crowd control, riot control, humanitarian rescue operations, assist in overall coordination
of large scale security arrangement as well as also assist Armed Forces in the condition of war/Emergency.
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’.
¢ Scholarships are also available in the institutes
based on merit’. =
Actin, ats [=}, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
(Availability of these scholarships can vary from OD iieececeseseteteeteneses
en) + Complete Class 10 or 12 in any stream (Science or
Arts preferred). Pursue short-term certificate courses
in leadership, physical fitness, security management,
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a or disaster management offered by vocational
portal for students seeking education loan. This training centers, private institutes, or government-run
portal has been developed under the guidance of skill development programmes.
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of « Diploma in Defence Studies, Security Management,
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks Public Safety, or Disaster Management. Offered by
Association (IBA). various vocational institutes.
° Some states have student credit cards with low - Bachelor’s Degree in Defence Studies, Security
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Management, or Public Administration.
Bihar, etc. « Master's in Defence Studies, National Security,
+ All banks give education loans. Disaster Management, or Strategic Studies.
* To become a CRPF Officer, candidates must clear
exams conducted by the Staff Selection Commission
(SSC) or Union Public Service Commission (UPSC),
specifically for roles such as Assistant Commandant.
6 Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
I 7
alts
)
E> - * x.
. \ } 555

Where will you work?
Places of Work : You can get employment opportunities in EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
any of the 243 battalions in CRPF. Assistant Commandant —> Deputy
Work Environment : The work timings are typically 6 to 7 Commandant — Commandant — Deputy
days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is Inspector General (DIG) >
applicable. You are expected to deal with challenging Inspector General (IG) > Additional
situations. Most of the work ts outdoors. Director General (ADG) — Special
Director General — Director General (DG)
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This list of institutes is indicative only
CRPF INSTITUTES
1. Internal Security Academy, Mountabu, Rajasthan
2. CRPF Academy, Mountabu, Gurugram, Haryana
3. Central Training Collage (CTC), Neemuch, Madhya Pradesh
4. Counter Insurgency And Anti Terrorist School, Silchar, Assam
q @
“
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
é | Annie Abraham - Appointed as the first woman IG in
. RAF (Rapid Action Force), Annie Abraham has
/[ managed to create history as well as break the
> proverbial glass ceiling of the blue dungarees.
Z* Abraham declares that she would take the RAF to
new heights.”
Source: timesofindia.indiatimes.com/in-
dia/crpf-gets-its-first-women-inspector-
generals/articleshow/95259692.cms
“The above information is for training purposes only and will not be
556 used for any commercial gains.

A Customs Officer is a government official responsible for overseeing the regulation of goods and commodities
entering or leaving a country. They ensure that customs laws are followed, taxes and duties on imported and
exported goods are paid, and illegal goods like contraband are prevented from entering the country.
* *
PERSONALITY TRAITS Ww.
+ You like helping people.
« You like working outdoors. FEES | COURSE FEE
« You are keen to serve the country and demonstrate —Y
valour. Y
¢ You like to have clear instructions to follow. Certificate (6 months — 1 year): Course fee ranges
from: 10,000 - 30,000*
Diploma (1 years): Course fee ranges from:
INR 20,000 - 60,000°
; . Undergraduate (3-4 years): Course fee ranges from:

¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit INR 40,000 - 1,50,000*
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by Postgraduate (2 years): Course fee ranges from:
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and INR 50,000 - 2,50,000*

State Schemes’. “These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute

« Scholarships are also available in the institutes to Institute.

d it. =

pes onmen | [=], EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY

‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from OD vicccccccseesesetesssseneeees

Mie Ho aE) + Complete Class 12 in any stream (preferably

Commerce or Science). Pursue certificate courses in
customs clearance, import/export procedures,

« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a logistics management, or trade laws offered by
portal for students seeking education loan. This vocational training centers or private institutes.
portal has been developed under the guidance of + Diploma in Customs Management, International Trade,
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Logistics, or Export and Import Procedures.

Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks , . .
Association (IBA) + Bachelor’s Degree in Commerce (B.Com), Business
: ; ; Administration (BBA), Economics, or International
« Some states have student credit cards with low Trade.
a ae as for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, + Master’s in International Business, Customs
nar, etc. Management, or Public Administration. Advanced
* All banks give education loans. studies focusing on international trade laws, customs
regulations, and administration.
« To become a Customs Officer, candidates must clear
y competitive exams conducted by the Staff Selection
Commission (SSC) or Union Public Service Commission
(UPSC) for the post of Indian Revenue Service
’ (Customs & Central Excise).
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
_ eo EXPECTED INCOME
“The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of a Customs Officer ranges
1 ~~ between INR 56,100 - 2,00,000* per month.
Source: https;//www.cgstandcustomsbbsr.nic.in-
/wp-content/up-
loads/2020/09/Monthly-Remuneration-received-by-
officers-employees-Including-system-of-compensation
Q -Section4 1 b-x.paf
6 on™ 557

Where will you work?
Places of Work: Airports, Border crossings. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7”
Work Environment: It is not a desk job. Local travel is not a Havaldar > Head Havaldar => Assistant
part of the job profile. It is a transferrable job. You are Sub-Inspector > Tax Assistant/Sub Inspector
likely to work 5 to 6 days a week and 8 to 9 hours every — Executive Assistant — Inspector, Customs >
day. Superintendent/Senior Intelligence
Officer/District Opium Officer/Appraising
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field . Office > Assistant Commissioner + Deputy
Commissioner —> Joint Commissioner >
Additional Commissioner — Commissioner >
Principal Commissioner + Chief
Commissioner/Director General — Chief
Commissioner
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. National Academy of Customs, Indirect Taxes & Narcotics (NACIN), Faridabad, Haryana
2. Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi
3. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy (SVPNPA), Hyderabad, Telangana
4. Indian Revenue Service (IRS) Academy, New Delhi
5. All India Management Association (AIMA), New Delhi
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Export & Import Management, Mumbai, Maharashtra
2. CMA (Customs & Management Academy), Chennai, Tamil Nadu
3. International Institute of Import & Export Management, Mumbai, Maharashtra
4. Apex Customs Academy, Pune, Maharashtra
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Yogendra Garg is the Chief Commissioner of Central
Goods and Services Tax, Customs and Central Excise,
Guwahati. He is also the zonal head for Indirect Taxes
in the north-east region. Garg did his Bachelor's in
Mechanical Engineering from the Punjab Engineering
College and a PGDM in marketing and financial
management from the Indian Institute of
Management, Bangalore.”
Source: htip;//bit.ly/3kOqmYU
“The above information is for training purposes only and will not be
used for any commercial gains.
558

An FSSAI Officer is a professional working with the Food Safety and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI), which is a
statutory body under the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India. The FSSAI is responsible for
regulating and supervising food safety standards in India to ensure that food products are safe, nutritious, and meet
quality standards.
Bar
PERSONALITY TRAITS W®.
« You are quick to take on new responsibilities.
¢ You can comfortably talk with all kinds of people. FEES | COURSE FEE
¢ You like to h lear instructions to follow. =
ou like to have clear instructions to follow Y
Certificate (6 months - 1 year): Course fee ranges
from: 10,000 - 50,000*
Diploma (1-2 years): Course fee ranges from:
INR 20,000 -1,00,000*
SCHOLARSHIPS
; ; . Undergraduate (3-4 years): Course fee ranges from:
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit INR 50,000 - 2,00,000"
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by Postgraduate (2 years): Course fee ranges from:
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and INR 1,00,000 - 3,00,000°
State Schemes’. “These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes to Institute.
based on merit’.
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from =
oe Fe EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
LOANS + Complete Class 12 in any stream (preferably Science
; ; ; _ .. or Commerce). Pursue certificate courses in food
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a safety, food hygiene, quality control, food laws, and
portal for students seeking education loan. This food technology offered by vocational training
portal has been developed under the guidance of centers or private institutes.
ils Dijpervateni au Aunshicte! SEMIeSs, (Miitis.R7 a + Diploma in Food Safety, Food Technology, or Food
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks .
9 4 Quality Control.
Association (IBA).
. ; ¢ Bachelor's Degree in Food Science, Food Technology,
« Some states have student credit cards with low Microbiology, or Biotechnolog
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, _ Ys Y. .
Bihar, etc. + Master's in Food Safety and Quality Management,
. . Food Technology, Food Science, or Public Health.
* All banks give education loans.

« To become an FSSAI Officer, candidates must clear
exams conducted by the FSSAI or other relevant
recruitment bodies.

Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.

le" EXPECTED INCOME
: U : ‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
Sw The approx. salary of an FSSAI officer ranges
between INR 25,000 - 2,18,200* per month
Source: hitps;//sites.fssat.gov.in/fssaideputation/-
files/advertisement. pdf
@ SOEEEDDID ED

Where will you work?
Places of Work: FSSAI’s offices across India. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7"
Work Environment: You will be working inan office set-up. Assistant > Assistant Manager —>
Local travel is likely to be a part of the job profile. It is a . . .
. ; Administrative Officer > Central Food Safety

transferrable job. You are likely to work 5 to 6 days a ; ; ;

kand 8 to 9h d Officer — Technical Officer + Deputy
week an O 7 noUrs EvETY GAY. Manager — Manager — Food Analyst
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Food Technology.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal
2. IIT Kharagpur, Kharagpur, West Bengal
3. Tezpur University, Tezpur, Tamil Nadu
4. Alagappa College of Technology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
5. National Institute of Food Technology, Entrepreneurship and Management, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu
6. Vaugh Institute of Agricultural Engineering and Technology, Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh
7. Kerala Agricultural University, Thrissur, Kerala
8. NIT Rourkela, Rourkela, Odisha
9. IK Gujral Punjab Technical University, Kapurthala, Punjab
10. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad University of Technology, Kolkata, West Bengal
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
‘(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Singhania University, Jnunjhunu, Rajasthan
2. Dr. DY Patil Biotechnology and Bioinformatics Institute, Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra
3. Dhanalakshmi Srinivasan Engineering College, Perambalur, Tamil Nadu
4. Musaliar College of Engineering, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala
5. Jaya Institute of Technology, Kanchipadi, Tamil Nadu
6. Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh
7. Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat
8. Kalasalingam Academy of Research and Education, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
9 See tere lo and Sciences Ishani Roy is a Food Safety Officer at Food Safety

i one Tamil Nad gy and Standards Authority of India (FSSAI) since 2018.

olmpatore, ami acu She has a B.Sc. in Horticulture from Uttar Banga Krishi
10. 10.Ballarpur Institute of Technology, Ballarpur, Viswavidyalaya, West Bengal.”

Maharashtra

Source: https;//www.quora.con/profile/Is-
¢€ @ hani-Roy-50
iy “The above information is for training purposes only and will not be
used for any commercial gains.
560

The Gramin Dak Sevak (GDS) assists the postmaster or sub-postmaster in the sale of stamps and stationery, and mail
transfers. He or she Is also involved in Railway Mail Services (RMS) such as opening and closing of bags, and bag
transport.
* *
PERSONALITY TRAITS W.
« You like to file or type.
» You are quick to take on new responsibilities. FEES | COURSE FEE
« You like to organize things (files, desks/offices). C,
Certificate (3 - 6 months): Course fee ranges from:
5,000 -— 20,000*
Diploma (3-6 months): Course fee ranges from:
INR 3,000 - 15,000°*
SCHOLARSHIPS . wl .
; ; . Postal Services-related Training (if provided by
+ National Scholarship Portal - Visit private institutes): INR 5,000 - 25,000*
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there .
are Central Government schemes offered by fais are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and ,
State Schemes’.
¢ Scholarships are also available in the institutes
d ir. =
_ asec on mer! [=], EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
(Availability of these scholarships can vary from OD icecccccesscsssesesessceeees
i) + Class 10th pass with passing marks in Mathematics,
LOANS English, and local language (as per the state).
; . ; ._ .. + Proficiency in the local language of the state/region is
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is G mandatory, which requires studying the local
portal for students seeking education loan. This language up to Class 10th.
portal has been developed under the guidance of . . .
. f . ae ¢ Candidates must hold a Basic Computer Training
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of - . .
. - . : Certificate (minimum of 60 days duration) froma
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks ved training institut
Association (IBA). recognized training institute.
- Some states have student credit cards with low ; ;
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
Bihar, etc.
- All banks give education loans.
eo” EXPECTED INCOME
/\ ‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of a Gramin Dak Sevak
ranges between INR 10,000 - 29,380* per
month
? Source:https://indiapostgdsonline.cept.gov.in/Notifi-  ° °
am | cations/Model_Notification.pdf _
| od --
QB 561
= > Ny
i
~

Where will you work?

Places of Work: Departmental offices like sub post offices, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH sr”

head post offices etc.

Work Environment: You will be working in an office set-up. Gramin Dak sevak (GDS) — Postal

. . 4 . Assistant/Sorting Assistant — Postmaster
Local travel is not a part of the job profile. You are likely to . .
K5t06d kand3to5h d (Branch/Sub-Post Office) > Senior
work 9 TO.0 Gays a Wee an o9 Nours every Gay. Postmaster/Assistant Superintendent >
oe . eee Superintendent of Post Offices — Director

Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. (Postal Services) — Chief Postmaster General

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

Any school in India approved by a recognized board

ea»
= VV
IT _ V/. \
x TH 5
wm, (
|
- EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Suman Bappa is the Branch Postmaster at India Post
( } in Kolkata. He has done his B.Tech. in Mechanical
Engineering from Techno India Salt Lake (TISL).”
Source:
https://www.quora.com/profile/Suman-Bappa
*The above information is for training purposes only and will not be
used for any commercial gains.
562

Officers of the Indian Administrative Service (IAS) hold some of the key positions in the Union government, state
governments, public-sector companies and other statutory regulatory institutions such as the Central Bank (RBI), SEBI,
and Election Commission. They are primarily responsible for regulating and monitoring the general administration and
law and order in the areas allotted to them. This function is then diversified into numerous other functions such as
supervising the implementation of developmental schemes and expenditure of public funds.
Mar
PERSONALITY TRAITS W.
« You are an ambitious person. FEES
+ You like trying to help people solve their problems. | oO COURSE FEE
« You are quick to take on new responsibilities. GF
Certificate (6 months - 1 year): Course fee ranges
from: 10,000 — 50,000*
Diploma (3 - 6 months): Course fee ranges from:
INR 20,000 - 70,000*
SCHOLARSHIPS Undergraduate (3 - 4 years): Course fee ranges
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit from: INR 30,000 - 1,50,000°*
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there Postgraduate (2 years): Course fee ranges from:
are Central Government schemes offered by INR 50,000 - 2,50,000*
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and ; ; ;
State Schemes’. These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
. . . . to Institute.
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes
pase onmett =| EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
"(Availability of these scholarships can vary from ES voccceeecsecccscacseseccsecene
time to time) . . . _ . . ;
¢ A Diploma in Public Administration, Political Science,
LOANS or Governance can be helpful to understand the
: basics of administrative work and governance
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a principles.
porta he scents Seeking education ean Unis F + A bachelor's degree in any discipline from a
ar ort vont a ope ig er ine Ne aa government-recognized university is mandatory to
ae Se hin ° A chro ervices, ( a the appear for the UPSC Civil Services Examination.
finance), (em OF FGUCATON ANA Nahan PANKs Degrees in disciplines such as Political Science, Public
ssociation (IBA). Administration, Economics, or Law can provide
« Some states have student credit cards with low relevant knowledge for administrative roles.
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, » Although not required, a Master's degree in Public
Bihar, etc. Administration, Political Science, or International
+ All banks give education loans. Relations can deepen your understanding of
governance, which may benefit you in the interview
stage or during service.

+ Candidates who have completed their MBBS final
year but are yet to complete their internship can
apply.

¢ Qualify the civil service exam held by the UPSC.

| Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
¢ S
Pa EXPECTED INCOME
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of a Civil Servant ranges
- between INR 56,100 - 2,25,000* or more per
month.
O—O
Po Source: hitps;//centralwagqfcouncil.gov.in/system/-
files/Advertise- _
QD ment-Post-Assistant-Administrative-Officer-deputation . .
pdt 2 « 563
AA Doce ee eee eae

Where will you work?
Places of Work: Central and State Government Agencies, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH s”
Departments and Ministries. erento
Work Environment: Your job role will need you to work raminw
both indoors and outdoors. You will handle a team of Assistant Secretary —> Under-Secretary —
officials. Local travel is a part of the job profile. It is a Deputy Secretary > Director > Joint
transferrable job. You are likely to work 5 to 6 days a Secretary + Additional Secretary >
week and 8 to 9 hours every day. Secretary — Cabinet Secretary of India
State Level
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. ane RNG
Undersecretary — Deputy Secretary — Joint
Secretary — Special Secretary-cum-Director
— Secretary-cum- Commissioner — Principal
Secretary — Additional Chief Secretary >
Chief Secretary
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY? a
District Level
Sub-Divisional Magistrate — Additional District
Magistrate > District Magistrate > Divisional
This list of institutes is indicative only (Coltaliissoutte> Phuc ems Celine
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration, Mussoorie, Uttarakhand
2. State Administrative Training Institutes, Various States
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
1. Chanakya IAS Academy, New Delhi
2. Vajiram & Ravi, New Delhi
3. Drishti |AS, New Delhi
4. ALS IAS Academy, New Delhi
5. InsightsIAS, Bengaluru, Karnataka
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Indian Administrative Service (IAS) officer Divya
Mittal is currently the District Magistrate of Mirzapur.
She belongs to the 2013 batch of the Uttar Pradesh
cadre. She has an MBA from the Indian Institute of
Management, Bangalore."
Source: https;//mirzapur.nic.in/profile-2/
“The above information is for training purposes only and will not be
used for any commercial gains.
564

An Indian Air Force (IAF) Officer is a commissioned officer in the Indian Air Force, responsible for safeguarding Indian
airspace, conducting aerial operations, and supporting ground troops in national defense. They play a critical role in
ensuring the nation's security through strategic air operations, humanitarian missions, and disaster relief.
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’.
* Scholarships are also available in the institutes
based on merit’ [=}, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
ae of these scholarships can vary from 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream, preferably the
Science stream (Physics, Chemistry and
Mat.hematics).
2. You have to then appear for National Defence
° VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, isa Academy (NDA) examination and then SSB
portal for students seeking education loan. This interview. All candidates have to pass the physical
portal has been developed under the guidance of and medical tests.
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of OR
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks Complete a Bachelor's d . . '
Association (IBA). omplete a Bachelor's degree in any science stream
and appear for the Combined. Defence Service (CDS)
» Some states have student credit cards with low Exam and Service Selection Board (SSB) interview. All
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, candidates have to pass the physical and medical
Bihar, etc. tests.
+ All banks give education loans. OR
For technical entry, complete a Bachelor's degree
(B.E./B.Tech) in Engineering after clearing entrance
examinations such as JEE Advanced, JEE Main, MET,
VITEEE, MHT CET, SRMJEE, COMEDK, UGET, KCET and
so on.
For entry into the Indian Armed Forces, you must clear
iy various written examinations, an SSB interview and also
various medical examinations, after which you can join
the Officers Training Academy.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
715 on
565

Where will you work?
Places of Work : You may expect to serve as a part of the
regiment or lead regiments depending upon the rank held
or serve in one of the training academies. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ~”
Work Envi t:Th k timi typically 6 to 7 . . .
d eheiaeanabiines ee cee ee ee Flying officer — Group captain squadron
ays a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is . pour
' ; leader — Air vice marshal — Air chief
applicable. You are expected to deal with challenging .
re ; marshal — Air marshal Marshal of the
situations. Most of the work is outdoors. You will be posted Indi
in different parts of India with frequent transfers. naan
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. National Defence Academy, Pune, Maharashtra
2. Air Force Academy, Dundigal, Telangana
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
1. Baalnoi Academy, New Delhi
2. Cavalier India, Bengaluru, Karnataka
3. Minerva Academy, Chandigarh
4. Olive Greens Institute, Chandigarh
5. The Cavalier, New Delhi
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Gunjan Saxena (born 1975)is an Indian Air
Force officer and former helicopter pilot.
She joined the IAF in 1996 and is a 1999
Kargil War veteran.She is one of the first
women to fly in a combat zone. One of her
main roles during the Kargil War was to
pot TT TAS evacuate the wounded from Kargil,
a . Vv transport supplies, and assist in
rN surveillance.She would go on to be part of
/ \ operations to evacuate over 900 troops,
/ ‘\ in both injured and deceased, from Kargil. In
/ \ 2004, after serving as a pilot for eight
! 1 ” years, her career as a helicopter pilot
! | ended; permanent commissions for women
\ 4% were not available during her time.
y
\ Source: https;//www. indianyouth.net/story-
\\ Gunjan-Saxena -inspire-youth/
N |
“ ‘The above information is for training purposes only
‘N 7 ; 9 P
~ Daa and will not be used for any commercial gains.

The Indian Army is the land based branch of the Indian Armed Forces and is also the largest arm of the same. The
main duties of an Indian Army officer is to ensure national security, integrity and unity as well as also being responsible
for defending the country against both internal and external threats and conduct humanitarian rescue operations
whenever and wherever necessary.

¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there DD vresessescsssseseessseessneeenes
are Central Government schemes offered by 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream, preferably the
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and Science stream (Physics, Chemistry and
State Schemes”. Mathematics)

« Scholarships are also available in the institutes 2. You have to then appear for National Defence
based on merit’. Academy (NDA) examination and then SSB

or . interview. All candidates have to pass the physical

“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from and medical tests

time to time) OR

Complete a Bachelor’s degree in any science stream
; . ; oo. and appear for the Combined Defence Service (CDS)

» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Exam and Service Selection Board (SSB) interview. All
portal for students seeking education loan. This candidates have to pass the physical and medical tests
portal has been developed under the guidance of OR
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of ;

Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks For technical entry, complete a Bachelor's degree
Association (IBA). (B.E,/B.Tech) in Engineering after clearing entrance
. . examinations such as JEE Advanced, JEE Main, MET,

« Some states have student credit cards with low VITEEE. MHT CET. SRMJEE. COMEDK. UGET. KCET and

interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, so on ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘
Bihar, etc. oo, .
. . For entry into the Indian Armed Forces, you must clear

» All banks give education loans. various written examinations, an SSB interview and also

various medical examinations, after which you can join
the Officers Training Academy..
- os % NY Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
— i \ NN
> = &
> S
567

Where will you work?
Places of Work : You may expect to serve as a part of the
regiment or lead regiments depending upon the rank held
or serve in one of the training academies.
Work Environment : The work timings are typically 6 to 7
days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is
applicable. You are expected to deal with challenging
situations. Most of the work is outdoors. You will be posted EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
in different parts of India with f t transfers. . . .
IN AUTSTANT PATS OT INAIG WHITE QUENT NTANSTSTS Lieutenant + Captain — Major > Lt.Colonel
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field. — Colonel > Brigadier > Major General >
Lt. General — General — Field Marshal
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Military Academy, Dehradun, Uttarakhand
2. Officers Training Academy, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
3. National Defence Academy, Pune, Maharashtra
4. Military Nursing Service (MNS) Training Institutes, Various locations in India
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
1. Baalnoi Academy, New Delhi
2. Cavalier India, Bengaluru, Karnataka
3. Minerva Academy, Chandigarh, Punjab
4. Olive Greens Institute, Chandigarh, Punjab
5. Tathagat Academy, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Captain Divya Ajith Kumar is an Army Air
Defence officer in the Indian Armed Forces.
She is a first-generation soldier who
~-- completed her training from Officers
ae _> WW Training Academy, Chennai. She is the first
-_ ~ woman officer to be conferred with the
yo \ Sword of Honour, usually given to the best
/ \ _ cadet by the Army. She also led the first
/ \ eye} all-women contingent of the Army on
/ ‘\ C Oy Republic Day in 2015. Kumar currently
| | serves in the Officers Training Academy,
\ ¢ 4 Chennai.”
\ N
\ ~ Source: https://www. indianyouth.net/sto-
\ ry-captain-divya-ajith-kumar-inspire-youth/
\
568 N ~ ‘ *The above information is for training purposes only
sO v7 and will not be used for any commercial gains.

An Indian Foreign Service (IFS) Officer is a senior civil servant and career diplomat who works for the Ministry of
External Affairs (MEA) of the Government of India. The primary responsibility of an IFS officer is to represent and
safeguard India's interests on the global stage, handling foreign relations and fostering diplomatic ties with other
nations.
Bar
PERSONALITY TRAITS WW.
« You are an ambitious person. FEES | COURSE FEE
+ You like trying to help people solve their problems. TY
« You are quick to take on new responsibilities. Y
Certificate (6 months — 1 year): Course fee ranges
from: 10,000 - 50,000°
Diploma (1 year): Course fee ranges from:
INR 20,000 - 70,000°
SCHOLARSHIPS Undergraduate (3 years): Course fee ranges from:
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit INR 30,000 — 2,00,000°
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there Postgraduate (2 years): Course fee ranges from:
are Central Government schemes offered by INR 50,000 - 3,00,000*
elhiterett slepenimems, JEC/ACUE cieremes em] “These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
State Schemes’. to Institute.
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes
based on merit’ ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from sreeeeeceeeeasecccecegeccceeecs
time to time) « No specific certification is required, but candidates
may pursue short-term courses in General Studies,
LOANS International Relations, or Current Affairs to build
. . . era foundational knowledge for UPSC preparation.
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This « A Diploma in International Relations, Political Science,
portal has been developed under the guidance of or Public Administration can help understand the
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of basics of governance, diplomacy, and global affairs,
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks useful for UPSC preparation.
Association (IBA). - A bachelor’s degree in any discipline from a
- Some states have student credit cards with low government-recognized university is mandatory to
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, appear for the UPSC Civil Services Examination.
Bihar. etc. Degrees in Political Science, International Relations,
Allb ‘ ks ai d ‘on | Economics, or Law can provide relevant knowledge
¥ GhLS give Selicehtion Fesins, for diplomatic roles.
« Although not required, a Master's degree in
International Relations, Political Science, or Public
Administration can deepen your understanding of
global diplomacy, international law, and governance,
which may benefit you during the exam and interview
stage.
¢ Qualify the civil service exam held by the UPSC.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
le" EXPECTED INCOME
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of an IFS officer ranges
between INR 60,000 - 2,24,000* or more per
month
QD Source: hitps;//doe.gov.in/files/cenetral-pay_docu- «+ +
ment/7cpc_report_eng.pdf ° ' 569
ee eo 0 © © © © © © © ee

Where will you work?
Places of Work: IFS officers are posted in the embassies
and consulates of India across the world.
Work Environment: You are likely to be posted in India or
abroad. You will work in an office set up. You will handle a
team of officials. It is a transferrable job. You are likely to EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ”
work 5 to 6 days a week and 8 to 9 hours every day. rele
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. neler Secretary ~~ Deputy Secretary —
Counsellor Director — Joint Secretary —
Additional Secretary — Secretary
Overseas
Attaché / Third Secretary — Second/First
Secretary — First Secretary — Director >
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY? Minister/DCM Ambassador —>
Ambassador/High Commissioner —
Ambassador/High Commissioner
This list of institutes ts indicative only
INSTITUTES
1. Foreign Service Institute (FSI), New Delhi
2. Chanakya IAS Academy, New Delhi
3. ALSIAS Academy, New Delhi
4. Vajiram & Ravi, New Delhi
5. Rau’s IAS Study Circl , New Delhi
6. Khan Study Group, New Delhi
7. Baalnoi Academy, New Delhi
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Chonira Belliappa Muthamma was the first
woman to pass the UPSC exam in 1949 and
opt for the Indian Foreign Service. Born in
Virajpet, Kodagu, she did her Bachelor's in
English Literature from Women's Christian
College in Chennai and Master's in the same
a p> from Presidency College, Chennai.”
Source: https;//starofmy-
sore.com/a-toast-to-diplomats/
*The above information is for training purposes only
and will not be used for any commercial gains.
570

An Indian Forest Service (IFS) Officer is a key civil servant who works in the Indian Forest Service, one of the three All
India Services under the Government of India. IFS officers are responsible for the conservation, management, and
protection of the country's forests and wildlife. They work in forest departments at the central, state, and district
levels and play a vital role in ensuring the sustainable management of India’s vast natural resources.
Mae
PERSONALITY TRAITS Ww.
« You like to work in teams. FEES | COURSE FEE
« You pay attention to details. aC,
« You like trying to help people solve their problems.
Certificate (6 months - 1 year): Course fee ranges
from: 5,000 — 20,000°
Diploma (1 year): Course fee ranges from:
INR 30,000 — 1,00,000*
SCHOLARSHIPS Undergraduate (3 - 4 years): Course fee ranges
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit from: INR 30,000 — 1,00,000°
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there Postgraduate (2 years): Course fee ranges from:
are Central Government schemes offered by INR 5,000 - 20,000°
slireront S/S, MEIC /AICIE colemes Cire ‘These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
State Schemes’. to Institute.
¢ Scholarships are also available in the institutes
based on merit’. =
Uh in, ots . [=|, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from OD iecsscsssssesesessseetseeseees
time to time) * No specific certification is required, but candidates
may pursue short-term courses in forestry, wildlife
LOANS management, environmental studies, or general
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a studies to build foundational knowledge for UPSC
portal for students seeking education loan. This preparation.
portal has been developed under the guidance of « A Diploma in Forestry, Wildlife Conservation, or
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Environmental Science can provide a foundational
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks understanding of forest management and
Association (IBA). conservation practices, which is beneficial for the
» Some states have student credit cards with low UPSC Civil Services Examination.
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, - A Bachelor's degree in any discipline from a
Bihar, etc. government-recognized university is mandatory to
- All banks give education loans. appear for the UPSC Civil Services Examination.
Preferred degrees include BSc (Forestry), BSc
(Botany/Zoology), BSc (Environmental Science), or
B.Tech (Environmental Engineering), as they provide
relevant knowledge for an IFS career.
¢ Although not required, a Master's degree in Forestry,
Wildlife Biology, Environmental Science, or
Botany/Zoology can deepen your understanding of
ecosystems, forest management, and conservation,
which may help in both the UPSC exam and the
) Le subsequent IFS career.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
). Fa EXPECTED INCOME
“The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of a Indian Forest Service
officer ranges between INR 38,000 - 41,000*
= per month.
a Source:https://www.glassdoor.co.in/Salaries/range-f ° °
Q orest-officer-salary-SRCH_KOO,20.htm * 571

Where will you work?

Places of Work: State forest departments.

Work Environment: You need to work both in indoors and

outdoors. You will handle a team of officials. Local travel is EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ~/

a part of the job profile. It is a transferrable job. You are

likely to work 5 to 6 days a week and 8 to 9 hours every Deputy Conservator of Forests — Conservator

day. of Forests — Chief Conservator of Forests >

Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. Additional Principal Chief Conservator of

Forests — Principal Chief Conservator of
Forests

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Indira Gandhi National Forest Academy (IGNFA) - Dehradun, Uttarakhand

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

1. Chanakya IAS Academy, New Delhi

2. ALS IAS Academy, New Delhi

3. Vajiram & Ravi, New Delhi

4. Rau's IAS Study Circle, New Delhi

5. Khan Study Group, New Delhi

6. Olive Greens Institute, Chandigarh, Punjab
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Parveen Kaswan is an Indian Forest Service
officer of the 2016 batch. He is a resident of
Mirzawali Mer village, Rajasthan. Kaswan
obtained a B.Tech. degree in Aerospace,
Aeronautical, and Aeronautical/Space
Engineering from Amity University in 2008.
He did his Master's in Forestry from Forest
Research Institute located in Dehradun.”

0 ) Source:http;//bit.ly/3HagCQe
*The above information is for training purposes only
and will not be used for any commercial gains
. gs
y! 6,
572
~~~
Oo A
y
A

An auxiliary to the Indian Police, the Indian Home Guard is a body which is responsible for enforcing and maintaining
order within the community in any kind of emergency. The main duties of a home guard is to help in maintenance of
essential services, promote communal harmony, assist the administration in protecting weaker sections, participate in
socio-economic and welfare activities and perform Civil Defence duties.
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and —
State Schemes’. EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
+ Scholarships are also available in the institutes « No specific certification is required, but candidates
based on merit’. may pursue short-term courses in disaster
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from management, fire safety, first aid, or civil defense to
time to time) build foundational knowledge and practical skills for
joining the Home Guard.
« A Diploma in Disaster Management, Civil Defense, or
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Fire Safety can be helpful to understand the basics of
portal for students seeking education loan. This emergency response, public safety, and community
portal has been developed under the guidance of service, which are relevant for Home Guard duties.
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of « Although not mandatory, a Bachelor's degree in any
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks discipline from a government-recognized university
Association (IBA). can be an advantage. Degrees in Physical Education,
. Some states have student credit cards with low Social Work, or Social Sciences may provide relevant
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha knowledge in community service, law enforcement,
Bihar. etc ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ and disaster management.
‘ . . « While not required, a Master's degree in Disaster
> Fillseikes GIMESeIeeriion IereIis Management, Public Safety, or Community Service
can deepen your understanding of emergency
response and safety protocols, which may benefit
you in the field.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
573

Where will you work?

Places of Work : You can find employment in the urban

and rural states as a home guard who assists the police

and provide auxiliary support. You can also work as a EXPECTED GROWTH PATH sy”

border wing home guard in border states. .. :

. _ . Civilian > Trainee Home Guard >
Work Environment : The work timings are typically 6 to 7
Home Guard

days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is

applicable. You are expected to deal with challenging

situations. Most of the work is outdoors.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. National Civil Defence College, Nagpur, Maharashtra

2. State Home Guard Training Centers, Various States in India

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

1. National Fire Service College, Nagpur, Maharashtra

2. Indian Red Cross Society, Various Locations in India

3. Indian Institute of Fire Engineering, Mumbai, Maharashtra
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
K. Radha - The first woman Home Guard
Officer in Kerala, K Radha championed the
cause of female home guard officers in
Kerala by arranging a meeting with R.
Sreelekha, the first woman IPS officer from
Kerala and became successful.”
Source: newindianexpress.com/states/ker-
ala/2020/nov/05/kasaragod-first-to-get-
woman-home-guard-22 19486.html
“The above information is for training purposes only
and will not be used for any commercial gains.

574

The Indian Navy is the maritime branch of the Indian Armed Forces and is one of the most prestigious marine army
forces in the world. An Indian Naval officer is expected to deter any and all marine threats to country and to aid the
other two armed forces (army and air force) in neutralising any threat to the country. The job of an Indian Naval
Officer also includes navigation, rescuing stranded castaways, and general maintenance and upkeep of heavy
machinery.
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’. =
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
based on merit’. 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream, preferably the
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Science stream (Physics, Chemistry and
time to time) Mathematics)
2. You have to then appear for National Defence
Academy (NDA) examination and then SSB
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a interview. All candidates have to pass the physical
portal for students seeking education loan. This and medical tests
portal has been developed under the guidance of OR
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Complete a Bachelor's degree in any science stream
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks and appear for the Combined
Association (IBA). Defence Service (CDS) Exam and Service Selection
- Some states have student credit cards with low Board (SSB) interview. All candidates have to pass the
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, physical and medical tests
Bihar, etc. OR
- All banks give education loans. For technical entry, complete a Bachelor's degree
(B.E./B.Tech) in Engineering after clearing entrance
examinations such as JEE Advanced, JEE Main, MET,
a VITEEE, MHT CET, SRMJEE, COMEDK, UGET, KCET and
so On.
q For entry into the Indian Armed Forces, you must clear
various written examinations, an SSB interview and also
. various medical examinations, after which you can join
| a the Officers Training Academy.
m. .« a
as | i 4) a = Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
lh
SS ee et Gi
for a ==
575

Where will you work?
Places of Work : You can join the Indian Navy in any one
of the 14 cadres broadly sorted into major branches such
as Executive, Engineering, Electrical. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ~”
Work Environment : The work timings are typically 6 to 7 Sub lieutenant — Lieutenant — Lt
sae eed 8 to 9 Tove Ee oa a eo is Commander > Commander — Captain
cee eee eee EN CNUSNING Commodore — Rear Admiral — Vice
situations. Most of the work is outdoors.
Admiral — Admiral — Grand Admiral
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. National Defence Academy (NDA), Khadakwasla, Pune, Maharashtra
2. Indian Naval Academy (INA), Ezhimala, Kerala
3. Naval Science & Technological Laboratory (NSTL), Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh
4. Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), Various Locations, India
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
1. CHANAKYA IAS Academy, New Delhi
2. Vajiram & Ravi, New Delhi
3. ALSIAS Academy, New Delhi
4. Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), Mumbai, Maharashtra
ims EXAMPLE FROMTHE FIELD [J
] ] R. Meera - Hailing from the Achanakal vil-
Sa rrr ; lage, She is the first woman Naval Officer
\\\ Y\\ \ ll TTTTT// from
\A\VVAAN ALL // Badagas, the single largest ethnic commu-
_ = nity in Nilgiris. After completing 22 weeks of
| i \ training, she graduated from the Indian
Naval Academy in Ezhimala, Kerala, to
TEE become a sub-lieutenant to join duty in the
~ naval armament inspectorate cadre in
a ° _— Kochi.”
2 =. a a : NS |
1 LI | dell a Source: https://www.deccanchronic-
TH || le.com/
1 Coo I ment ih . .
= | a nation/in-other-news/300522/meera-first-
- badaga-woman-to-become-naval-offi-
r ; \ cer.html
*The above information is for training purposes only
576 , pl
— and will not be used for any commercial gains.

The Indian Police Service (IPS) is one of the three All India services, the other two being IAS and IFS. IPS officers
provide senior level leadership to police forces, both at the state and central level and also to the paramilitary
forces (BSF, CISF, CRPF, ITPB, NSG and SSB).
5 Nes
PERSONALITY TRAITS w.
- FEES | COURSE FEE
« You are an ambitious person. TY
+ You like trying to help people solve their problems. Y
« You are quick to take on new responsibilities. ertificate (6 months — 1 year): Course fee ranges
Y ick to tak ibiliti Certificate (6 ths — 1 S f
from: 10,000 — 50,000*
Diploma (1 year): Course fee ranges from:
INR 20,000 — 70,000*
Undergraduate (3 - 4 years): Course fee ranges
eka el Ele from: INR 30,000 - 1,50,000°
> National Scholarship Portal - Visit Postgraduate (2 years): Course fee ranges from:
www-.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there INR 50,000 — 2,50,000*
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and “These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
State Schemes’. to Institute.
¢ Scholarships are also available in the institutes
based on merit’.
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
fina f fie) secsecessseeesesseeeeseeseees ces
« No specific certification is required, but candidates
LOANS may pursue short-term courses in general studies,
. . . : . public administration, or current affairs to build
> VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, sce foundational knowledge for the UPSC Civil Services
portal for students seeking education loan. This Examination (CSE) preparation.
portal has been developed under the guidance of . : : _ : .. .
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of oA Diploma in Public Administration, Political Science,
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks or Criminal Law can be helpful in understanding the
Association (IBA) basics of law enforcement and administrative work.
« Some states have student credit cards with low * A Bachelor's degree n any discipline from a
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha government-recognized university is mandatory to
Bihar. etc ’ ’ ‘ ‘ appear for the UPSC Civil Services Examination.
oe . + Although not required, a Master’s degree in Public
- All banks give education loans. Administration, Political Science, Law, or Criminal
Justice can deepen your understanding of governance
and law enforcement, which may be beneficial during
4 the interview stage or while serving.
. g | |
ye \ tt Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
” MAN
| WR Glee
—
yo wy
Ww
oe" EXPECTED INCOME
= ‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
y a 4 NS The approx. salary of an IPS officer ranges
4 \ between INR 56,100 - 2,70,000* or more per
1 month.
—_—] ZZzNO) = Source: hitps;///timespro.com/blog/a-comprehen- ee
Oi sive-guide-to-ips-salary-structure-in-india se
«© © 577

Where will you work?

Places of Work: An IPS officer works for the State Police

machinery and the Central Armed Police Forces (CAPF).

They are employed by the State and Central Government.

J peewee EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7

Work Environment: Your job role will need you to work . . .

both indoors and outdoors. You will handle a team of Deputy Superintendent of Police ? Assistant

officials. Local travel is a part of the job profile. It is a Superintendent of Police > Superintendent of

transferrable job. You are likely to work 5 to 6 days a Police — Deputy Inspector Generel eo “olise

week and 8 to 9 hours every day. — Inspector General of Police — Additional

Director General of Police + Director General

Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. of Police

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy, Hyderabad, Telangana

2. Central Detective Training Institutes (CDTIs), Various Locations in India

3. Indian Police Academy, Various Locations in India

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

1. Chanakya IAS Academy, New Delhi

2. Vajiram & Ravi, New Delhi

3. ALS IAS Academy, New Delhi

4. Civil Services Coaching Institute, Various Locations in India
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Renuka Mishra currently leads the State
Special Investigation Team of the Uttar
Pradesh Police. She has thirty-two years’
experience in policing. She has an M.A. in
Criminal Justice/Police Science from the
Annamalai University.”
Source: hitp;//bit.ly/3J|Zf2b
“The above information is for training purposes only
and will not be used for any commercial gains.

578

The Indian Railway Accounts Service officers are responsible for the management of accounts and finances of the
Indian Railways. A necessary part of this function is to scrutinize all transactions and record only those transactions,
which are legitimately chargeable to the railways’ revenues.
Mar
PERSONALITY TRAITS W.
« You can keep accurate records of expenses and
You enjoy Sei | FS | COURSE FEE
« You enjoy Science. mC,
« You are good at Maths. GF
Certificate (6 months — 1 year): Course fee ranges
from: 10,000 — 50,000*
Diploma (1 year): Course fee ranges from:
SCHOLARSHIPS INR 20,000 - 70,000*
+ National Scholarship Portal - Visit Undergraduate (3 — 4 years): Course fee ranges
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there from: INR 30,000 - 1,50,000°
aie (Genial Gieveuinintein Sencnnes erence By) Postgraduate (2 years): Course fee ranges from:
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and INR 20 000-2 50 000° g ;
State Schemes”. ‘ a
* Scholarships are also available in the institutes “These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
nosed en merit’. to Institute.
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from
time to time)
LOANS EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
- VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a eee
portal for students seeking education loan. This 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream.
portal has been developed under the guidance of 2. Pursue a Bachelor's in Engineering, Commerce, or
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Chartered Accountancy.
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks OR
ESSE feillont (121) ; Complete Bachelor's and follow it up with a Master's in
- Some states have student credit cards with low the same or allied field.
Show rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, 3. Qualify Indian Railways Management Service exam
Ine ue held by UPSC.
¢ All banks give education loans.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
~~
(or) EXPECTED INCOME
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
The salary of an Indian Railway Accounts Service
—+4 Officer ranges between INR 56,100 — 1,82,200°
— ot tf per month.
== —
Of, R280 . Source: https;//testbook.com/ias-prepara-
tion/indian-railway-accounts-service-iras-salary , ,
y ™_™ = QD ee 371°)

Where will you work?
Places of Work: Indian Railways, government agencies
and ministerial departments.
Work Environment: You will work in an office set up. You EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ~/
are likely to handle a team. Local travel is not a part of the
job profile. You are likely to work 5 to 6 days a week and 8 Assistant Financial Advisor/Assistant
to 9 hours every day. Divisional Financial Manager/ Assistant
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. ISHLGIS)S ASSSLIS Olmos j/ ASsisreln.
Financial Advisor (Traffic) — Senior
Assistant Financial Advisor/ Divisional
Financial Manager / Workshop Accounts
Officer / Senior Assistant Financial Advisor
— Deputy Financial Advisor & Chief
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY? Accounts Office — Deputy Financial
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering/Commerce.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi
3. Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
4. Indian Institute of Management, Calcutta, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES (4
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu f LN
2. Birla Insitute of Technology, Rajasthan
3. SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Kallankuthar, Tamil Nadu
4. Narsee Monjee Institute of Management Studies, Mumbai, Maharashtra
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - ) my
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html = 20g
i =
cA AG a
+ VA
—\} \ J
\ >
ee /; _
580

Indian Railways Personnel Service (IRPS) officers handle the welfare of Indian Railways’ employees. Since the
Railways has more than 1.5 million employees, the IRPS plays a crucial role in managing inter-service relationships
and employment conditions.
ar
PERSONALITY TRAITS Ww.
FEES | COURSE FEE
« You can comfortably talk with all kinds of people. TY
You enjoy Science. Y
« You are good at Maths. Certificate (6 months - 1 year): Course fee ranges
¢ You like to lead. from: 10,000 - 50,000*
Diploma (1 year): Course fee ranges from:
INR 20,000 — 70,000°
Undergraduate (3 — 4 years): Course fee ranges
from: INR 30,000 - 1,50,000°
SCHOLARSHIPS
. ; , Postgraduate (2 years): Course fee ranges from:

¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit INR 50,000 - 2,50,000"
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by “These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and “ome.

State Schemes’.

« Scholarships are also available in the institutes =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
based on merit’. DO viiceeesssscssseteseeceneneneaes

“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from » No specific certification is required, but candidates

time fo time) may pursue short-term courses in Human Resource

Management, Labour Laws, or General Studies.

LOANS : : :

¢ A Diploma in Human Resource Management, Public

« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, \s a Administration, or Labour Laws can be helpful to
portal for students seeking education loan. This understand the basics of personnel management,
portal has been developed under the guidance of governance principles, and laws related to labor.
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of - A bachelor's degree in any discipline from a
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks government-recognized university is mandatory to
Association (IBA). appear for the UPSC Civil Services Examination.

» Some states have student credit cards with low Degrees in Human Resource Management, Public
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Administration, Business Administration, or Sociology
Bihar. etc. ‘ ‘ can provide relevant knowledge for administrative

. Al — give education loans. roles in the Indian Railway Personnel Service.

+ Although not required, a Master's degree in Human
Resource Management, Public Administration, Labour
Laws, or Business Administration (MBA) can deepen
your understanding of human resource management,
y which may benefit you in the interview stage or during
service.
r
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
| p
oe" EXPECTED INCOME
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
The salary of an Indian Railway Personnel Service
Officer ranges between INR 15,600 - 2,15,900*
per month.
Source:https;//likd.in/indian-railway-personnel-s_ °°
QD ervice-irps/ ‘a
581

Where will you work?
Places of Work: Indian Railways, government agencies
and ministerial departments. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH wt"
Work Environment: You will work in an office set up. You ; ; ;
are likely to handle a team. Local travel is not a part of the Assistant Personnel Officer — Senior Personnel
job profile. You are likely to work 5 to 6 days a week and 8 Officer/Divisional Personnel Officer > Deputy
to 9 hours every day. Chief Personnel Officer/ Senior Divisional
Personnel Officer — Chief Personnel
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. Officer/Divisional Railway
Manager/Additional Divisional Railway
Manager
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
3. Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Assam
4. Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh
5. Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
6. Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore, Karnataka
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
1. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka
2. Amity university, Mumbai, Maharashtra
3. Sharda University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh
4. Christ University, Bangalore, Karnataka
ry’
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Anand Madhukar is an IRPS (Indian Railway
Personnel Service) Officer of 1997 Civil
~~ Services Examination Batch. At present, he is
N 4 posted as officer on Special Duty at Joint
Secretary Level in the Department of
Financial Services, Ministry of Finance.
Madhukar holds a Master's in History from
pe. Hansrqj College, Delhi University.”
Source: hittps;//nhb.org.in/anand-madhu-
[ kar-profile/
“The above information is for training purposes only
and will not be used for any commercial gains
582

Officers of the Indian Railway Service of Electrical Engineers are responsible for managing the electrical engineering
organisation of the Indian Railways. The latter has technical and non-technical departments. Technical departments
include civil, electrical and mechanical engineering, signaling and telecom, and several others dealing with similar
disciplines. Control of operation and movement is done by traffic services. The non-technical departments include
general services such as accounts, personnel management, Railway Protection Force (RPF) or security, among others
Bar
PERSONALITY TRAITS W.
+ You enjoy Science.
* You are good at Maths.
+ You like to lead.
| = | COURSE FEE
?
Certificate (6 months - 1 year): Course fee ranges
from: 10,000 - 50,000*
Diploma (1 year): Course fee ranges from:
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit INR 20,000 — 70,000*
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there Undergraduate (3 - 4 years): Course fee ranges
are Central Government schemes offered by from: INR 30,000 — 1,50,000*
St Seen mSne, UGC/AICTE Schemes and Postgraduate (2 years): Course fee ranges from:
; INR 50,000 - 2,50,000*
+ Scholarships are also available in the institutes
based on merit”. ea are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from :
time to time)
ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream.
porta he students seeking education eon This i 2. A three year diploma electrical engineering or
portal has been developed under the guidance o ; . ; . .
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of a bachelor’s degree in electrical engineering,
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks OR
Association (IBA). ; . . .
; Follow it up with a master’s in the same of allied
+ Some states have student credit cards with low field
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, ,
Bihar, etc. Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
¢ All banks give education loans.
vest @ een)
en EXPECTED INCOME
ry “The figures are indicative & subject to change
rd
La
The salary of an Indian Railway Service of
alll il. Electrical Engineers ranges between
@® @ INR 50,000 - 1,04,000* per month.
Source:https;//www.ambitionbox.com/salaries/i
[ ] ndian-railways-salaries/electrical-engineer
4 Qi 583

Where will you work?
Places of Work: Indian Railways, government agencies
and ministerial departments. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH f~/
Work Environment: You will work in an office set up. You Assistant Electrical Engineer —> Divisional
are likely to handle a team. Local travel is not a part of the Electrical Engineer +> Deputy Chief Electrical
job profile. You are likely to work 5 to 6 days a week and 8 Engineer/Senior Divisional Electrical Engineer
to 9 hours every day. — Chief Electrical General Engineer/Loco
Engineer > Traction Engineer — Distribution
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. Engineer —> Chief Electrical Engineer >
Additional Member Electrical & General
Manager — Member Electrical
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi
3. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai,
Maharashtra
A. Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, West Bengal
5. Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
6. Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Uttarakhand
7. Government Polytechnic, Mumbai, Maharashtra
8. Government Polytechnic, Pune, Maharashtra
9. Nitte Meenakshi Institute of Technology, Bangalore,
Karnataka
10. PSG Polytechnic College, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS
“(To be checked with UGC and AICTE for its affiliation and accreditation)
1. Christ University, Bangalore, Karnataka
2. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan
3. Sharda University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66 |
4. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu Yatendra Kumar is currently the Additional
5. Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra, Rachi, Jharkhand General Manager (AGM) of Northeast
6. Manipal University, Jaipur, Rajasthan Frontier Railway. He belongs to the 1988
7. Presidency University, Bangalore, Karnataka batch of Indian Railway Service of Electrical
8. Sathyabama Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai, Engineers and joined the Railways in 1990.
Tamil Nadu . . Kumar did his graduation in Electrical
9. Amity University, Mumbai, Maharashtra Engineering from Dayalbag Educational
. . . Institute, Agra.”
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.hirnl Source: hitps;//morungexpress.com/yaten-
dra-ku-
mar-takes-charge-as-agm-of-nf-railway
“The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains.
584

IRSE officers are responsible for the maintenance of all fixed assets of the Indian Railways, such as tracks, bridges,
buildings, roads, water supply etc. In addition, they are also responsible for construction of new assets such as new
lines, gauge conversion, doubling and other expansion and developmental work.
Bar
PERSONALITY TRAITS WX.
e You like to build things. FEES
+ You are good at Maths. | — | COURSE FEE
« You like to lead. Y
Certificate (6 months — 1 year): Course fee ranges
from: 10,000 - 50,000*
Diploma (1 year): Course fee ranges from:
INR 20,000 — 70,000*
. : . Undergraduate (3 - 4 years): Course fee ranges
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit ; 9 ( y J: g
. : . from: INR 30,000 - 1,50,000
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by Postgraduate (2 pedis Course fee ranges from:
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and INR 50,000 - 2,50,000
State Schemes’. “These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
- Scholarships are also available in the institutes to Institute.
based on merit’.
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY _
time to time)
« No specific certification is required.
« A Diploma in Civil Engineering, Mechanical
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Engineering, Electrical Engineering, or related fields
' ; : ; can be helpful to understand the basics of
portal for students seeking education loan. This _ . . ;
; engineering work, particularly railway infrastructure
portal has been developed under the guidance of and systems
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of y . ; : : :
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks - A Bachelor's degree in Engineering (B.Tech/BE) in
Association (IBA). Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Electrical
. . Engineering, or related fields from a
° Some states have student credit cards with low government-recognized university is mandatory to
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, appear for the UPSC Civil Services Examination.
SNIST;, Ete. ; ; « Although not required, a Master's degree in
- All banks give education loans. Engineering (e.g., M.Tech in Civil, Mechanical, or
Electrical Engineering) can deepen your knowledge
in specialized areas such as railway design,
Tek 2 CL infrastructure development, or transportation systems,
ae which may be beneficial during the interview stage or
— in service.
:
ba Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
| | fl. The figures are taken from NCS indicative & subject to change
Re: 'e" EXPECTED INCOME
> . | “The figures are indicative & subject to change
ab, |
WA 1 The salary of an Indian Railway Service of !
— 1 Engineers ranges between INR 35,800 —
| 1,41,600* per month.
' — Source: htips://www.ambitionbox.com/sala- |. .
Q ries/indian-railways-salaries/engineer ! _
Lee 585

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: Indian Railways. yw
Work Environment: You will work in an office set EXPECTED GROWTH PATH
up. You are likely to handle a team. Local travel is Assistant Divisional Engineer > Divisional
not a part of the job profile. You are likely to work Engineers > Senior Divisional Electrical
5 to 6 days a week and 8 to 9 hours every day. Engineer ~ Deputy Chief Electrical
Engineer > Chief Electrical Engineer >
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field . Member Railway Board (Electrical) >
Chairman Railway Board
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This courses are offered by the Departments of Civil
Engineering/ Structural Engineering
“This list of institutes Is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, West Bengal
3. Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Uttarakhand
4. Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar, Odisha
5. Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
6. Coimbatore Institute of Technology, Tamil Nadu
7. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad University of Technology, Kolkata Manoj Sharma, an IRSE officer of the 1985
8. Veer Surendra Sai University of Technology, Odisha batch, has joined the East Coast Railway as
9. Jamia Milia University, New Delhi General Manager. Prior to the new posting,
10. Delhi Technological University, New Delhi sharma worked as Chiet Administrative
g y, ° 3
Officer (construction) of Central Railway
PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS (CR) in Mumbai. Sharma is a Civil Engineer
‘(To be checked with UGC and AICTE for its affiliation and accreditation) with a degree from the University of
Roorkee and a Master's in Technology from
1. Chitkara University Institute of Engineering and Technology, IIT Delhi. He joined Indian Railways in 1987."
Chandigarh
2. University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, Dehradun, Source: http;//bit.ly/3 WN3qqo
Uttarakhand
3. Kalinga Institute of Industrial Technology, Bhubaneshwar, “The above information is for training purposes only
Odisha and will not be used for any commercial gains.
4. SASTRA Deemed University, Tamil Nadu
5. Lovely Professional University, Punjab
6. Jaipur National University, Rajasthan
7. Amity University, Raipur, Chhatisgarh
8. Chandigarh University, Punjab
9. KIIT School of Engineering, Odisha
10. Silver Oak College of Engineering and Technology,
Ahmedabad
586

Indian Railway Service of Mechanical Engineers are primarily responsible for the design, manufacture, deployment
and maintenance of the rolling stock of Indian Railways. Rolling stock refers to all the engines and carriages that are
used on a railway.
Bar
PERSONALITY TRAITS Wy.
+ You like to build things.
+ You are good at Maths. FEES | COURSE FEE
- You like to lead. RC
+ You enjoy repairing all kinds of mechanical objects. we
Certificate (6 months - 1 year): Course fee ranges
from: 10,000 — 50,000*
Diploma (1 year): Course fee ranges from:
INR 20,000 - 70,000*
SCHOLARSHIPS Undergraduate (3 - 4 years): Course fee ranges
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit from: INR 30,000 - 1,50,000
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there Postgraduate (2 years): Course fee ranges from:
are Central Government schemes offered by INR 50,000 — 2,50,000
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and “These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
State Schemes’. to Institute.
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes
based on merit’. =}, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Terrence ees
time to time) « No specific certification is required.
« A Diploma in Mechanical Engineering or related
LOANS fields can be helpful to understand the basics of
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a mechanical systems, which are essential for the
portal for students seeking education loan. This role of IRSME Officers. This is not mandatory but
portal has been developed under the guidance of can provide a useful background.
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of - A Bachelor's degree in Mechanical Engineering
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks or related fields (e.g., Production Engineering,
MeacreLsiem (EIA) ; Automotive Engineering) is mandatory to appear
« Some states have student credit cards with low for the UPSC Civil Services Examination. The
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, degree must be from a recognized university.
EIN, EUs. « Although not required, a Master's degree in
» All banks give education loans. Mechanical Engineering or related fields (e.g.,
Thermal Engineering, Industrial Engineering) can
\ / provide advanced knowledge in mechanical
rN O systems and railways, which may benefit you
[~ - O during training and in your role as an officer.
aS 7 @) Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
\
ie" EXPECTED INCOME
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
The salary of an Indian Railway Service of
Mechanical Engineers ranges between
INR 16,700 - 83,400* per month.
Source:https;//www.ambitionbox.com/salaries/i * °
QD ndian-railways-salaries/mechanical-engineer WT

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: Indian Railways. NW
Work Environment: You will work in an office set EXPECTED GROWTH PATH
up. You are likely to handle a team. Local travel is Assistant Mechanical Engineer — Divisional
not a part of the job profile. You are likely to work Mechanical Engineer — Senior Mechanical
5 to 6 days a week and 8 to 9 hours every day. Engineer — Divisional Railway Manager >
Chief Mechanical Engineer (Planning) > Chief
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. Mechanical Engineer + General Manager >
Additional Member (Mechanical Engineering)
— Member (Mechanical) — Chairman
(Railway Board)
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Mechanical Engineering
“This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra
2. College of Engineering, Pune, Maharashtra
3. Maharaja Sayaqjirao University of Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat
4. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi
5. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
6. LD College of Engineering, Ahmedabad , Gujarat EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [33]
8. Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai, Maharashtra Anupam Sharma, is the General Manager
PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS of East Central Railway (ECR). Sharma, an
*(To be checked with UGC and AICTE for its affiliation and accreditation) Sule Ci tS uate NelNve is en) cs
Mechanical Engineers (IRSME), had joined
1. MIT Manipal, Manipal, Karnataka the Indian Railways as a Special Class
2. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Andhra Pradesh Apprentice in 1982. He has a Master’s in
3. SRM University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu Financial Management from Mumbai
4. Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering, Bengaluru, Karnataka University, a post graduate diploma in
5. RV College of Engineering, Bengaluru, Karnataka Public Management and Policy (PGD-PMP)
6. PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu from Indian Institute of Management,
7. Ramaiah Institute of Technology, Bengaluru, Karnataka Ahmedabad, and has attended leadership
8. BMS College of Engineering, Bengaluru, Karnataka courses at Bocconi University at Milan, Italy
and Carnegie Mellon University at
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - Pittsburgh, USA.”
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
Source: http;//bit.ly/3WN3qqo
“The above information is for training purposes only
and will not be used for any commercial gains.
588

The Indian Railway Service of Signal Engineers are responsible for the planning, design, commissioning and
maintenance of signalling and telecommunication infrastructure of the rail system. This ensures the safe, efficient and
punctual running of trains in addition to enhancing the line capacity of Indian Railways.
we
PERSONALITY TRAITS w.
« You enjoy Science.
« You are good at Maths.
¢ You like to lead. TEES
— | COURSE FEE
EA
Certificate (6 months - 1 year): Course fee ranges
from: 10,000 - 50,000*
Diploma (1 year): Course fee ranges from:
SCHOLARSHIPS INR 20,000 - 70,000*
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit Undergraduate (3 - 4 years): Course fee ranges
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there from: INR 30,000 — 1,50,000°
are Central Government schemes offered by Postgraduate (2 years): Course fee ranges from:
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and INR 50,000 - 2,50,000*
State Schemes’.
. . . _ “These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes fo Institute.
based on merit’.
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from EB EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
time to time) ~ QD vicccsessesseesesesssecseseees
LOANS + No specific certification is required.
; ; . oo. « A Diploma in Electronics Engineering, Electrical
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, sa Engineering, or Signal Engineering can be helpful
portal for students seeking education loan. This ‘ . . ;
portal has been developed under the guidance of to understand the basis of signalling systems
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of used in railways. a
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks - A Bachelor's degree in Electronics Engineering,
Association (IBA). Electrical Engineering, or Telecommunication
+ Some states have student credit cards with low Engineering is mandatory fo appear for the
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, UPSC Civil Services Examination. The degree
Bihar, etc. must be from a recognized university.
~ All banks give education loans. « Although not required, a Master’s degree in
Electronics Engineering, Telecommunication
Engineering, Signal Engineering, or Electrical
Da CD Engineering can provide advanced knowledge
in signalling systems and railways, which may
| i | benefit you during training and in your role as an
’ officer.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
@ @
4
NAYS, EXPECTED INCOME
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
The salary of an Indian Railway Service of Signal
Engineers ranges between INR 22,000 — 67,000°
per month.
Source:https;//www.glassdoor.co.in/Salaries/rai_ , ,
lway-signal-engineer-salary-SRCH_KOO,23_IP2.h = =»
BQ tms _
ee © © © © © © © © we ee ~589

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: Indian Railways, government
agencies and ministerial departments. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
Work Environment: You will work in an office set Assistant Signal & Telecommunication Engineer
up. You are likely to handle a team. Local travel is —» Senior Signal & Telecommunication Engineer
not a part of the job profile. You are likely to work — Deputy Chief Signal & Telecommunication
5 to 6 days a week and 8 to 9 hours every day. Engineer — Chief Planning Engineer (Signal &
Telecommunication) > Chief Signal Engineer
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. —» Chief Communication Engineer — Chief
Signal & Telecommunication Engineer
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
3. Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Assam
4. College of Engineering, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
5. Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad, Telangana
6. Rajasthan Technical University, Kota, Rajasthan
7. Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka
2. Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering, Bangalore, Karnataka
3. Sathyabama Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
4. Dr. Ambedkar Institute of Technology, Bangalore, Karnataka
5. Nitte Meenakshi Institute of Technology, Bangalore, Karnataka
6. Bannari Amman Institute of Technology, Tamil Nadu
7. Madras Institute of Technology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
EXAMPLE FROMTHE FIELD [J
N. Kashinath is Member (Signal & Telecom)
of the Railway Board. He belongs to the
1980 batch of the Indian Railway Service of
Signal Engineers (IRSSE). Prior to this
assignment, he worked as DG (Signal &
Telecom), Railway Board. Kashinath has
graduated in Electronics and
Telecommunication Engineering from
Government Engineering College, Jabalpur.”
Source: https;//pib.gov.in/newsite/PrintRe-
lease.aspx?relid= 189798
590 “The above information is for training purposes only
and will not be used for any commercial gains.

IRSS officers are responsible for making procurement of stock and non-stock items required for safe running of
trains. These trained professionals ensure the proper upkeep/maintenance of rolling stock (locomotives, coaches,
wagons etc.), infrastructure (track, signalling systems, buildings etc.), operation of assets (lubricating oils etc.) and
production and repairs in workshops
Mar
PERSONALITY TRAITS w. —
« You are a careful and organized person. | —Y COURSE FEE
+ You can make people work under your directions. SF
+ You like to lead. Certificate (6 months - 1 year): Course fee ranges
from: 10,000 - 50,000*
Diploma (1 year): Course fee ranges from:
INR 20,000 - 70,000*
Undergraduate (3 - 4 years): Course fee ranges
from: INR 30,000 - 1,50,000*
Postgraduate (2 years): Course fee ranges from:
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit INR 50,000 — 2,50,000
www-.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there “These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
are Central Government schemes offered by to Institute.
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’.
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
based on merit’. N if fication i red
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from ° A Diplo c cert cation is require . .
time to time) . iploma in Mechanical Engineering, Electrical
Engineering, Materials Management, or Logistics
can be helpful to understand the basics of the
; . . .. railway's stores and supply management system.
> VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, \s a « A Bachelor's degree in any discipline from a
portal for students seeking education loan. This ; . 4
portal has been developed under the guidance of government-recognized university 's mandatory
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of to appear for the UPSC Civil Services _
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks Examination. Engineering degrees, Logistics,
Association (IBA). Materials Management, or Supply Chain
+ Some states have student credit cards with low Management courses may provide relevant
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, knowledge for the role.
Bihar, etc. « Although not required, a Master’s degree in
- All banks give education loans. Logistics, Materials Management, Supply Chain
Management, Public Administration, or related
fields can provide advanced knowledge in
mom |i am managing the railway stores system, which may
=~ benefit you during training and in your role as an
r Pe officer.
all il. Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
= - EXPECTED INCOME
~~ “The figures are indicative & subject to change
e |
= The salary of an Indian Railway Stores Service
Officer ranges between INR 78,400 — 1,00,000*
per month.
Source:htips;//www.ambitionbox.com/salaries/i
QD ndian-railways-salaries/store-incharge
591

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: Indian Railways and other
government departments/ministries. Tn
Work Environment: Your job role will need you to EXPECTED GROWTH PATH
work both indoor and outdoor. You will be visiting Assistant Materials Manager —> Divisional
warehouses and loco sheds. You will handle a team of Materials Manager —> Senior Divisional
officials. You are likely to work 5 to 6 days a week Materials Manager/Deputy Chief Materials
and 8 to 9 hours every day. Manager — Chief Materials Manager >
Principal Materials Manager — General
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. Manager — Member (equivalent to
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology (IITs), Various locations in India
2. National Institutes of Technology (NITs), Various locations in
India
3. Indian Institutes of Management (IIMs), Various locations in
India
4. Indian Railways Institute of Logistics & Materials Management
(IRILMM), Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
5. Indian Institute of Materials Management (IIMM), Various
locations in India
PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS
“(To be checked with UGC and AICTE for its affiliation and accreditation)
1. Institute of Logistics & Aviation Management (ILAM), New
Delhi
2. International School of Business & Media (ISBM), Pune,
Maharashtra
3. Loyola Institute of Business Administration (LIBA), Chennai,
Tamil Nadu
4. Symbiosis Institute of Business Management (SIBM), Pune,
Maharashtra EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
5. XLRI Jamshedpur, Jamshedpur, Jharkhand Mukul Mohan is the Deputy Chief Materials
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - Manager with the Indian Railways. Mohan
“find 9023/Ranking html has done his B.Tech. from National Institute
www.nirfindia.org/ /Ranking.htm of Technology, Warangal. His responsibilities
involve supply chain management,
warehousing and transportation. Between
2005 and 2007 Mohan was the Assistant
Director with the Central Water Commission.”
Source: https;//coffeemug.ai/con-
tact/mukul-mohan-543b597/
“The above information is for training purposes only
and will not be used for any commercial gains.
592

IRTS officers are responsible for the smooth and fast transportation of freight and passengers. He or she ensures
optimum utilization of assets. This is achieved by coordinating with the service departments looking after various
assets of railways like track, wagons, engines, signals, etc. There are two main streams of Traffic Department-
Operations and Commercial, where these officers are posted.
Mae
PERSONALITY TRAITS Ww.
« You are a careful and organized person. FEES
« You can make people work under your directions. — COURSE FEE
» You like to lead. (=)
Certificate (6 months — 1 year): Course fee ranges
from: 10,000 - 50,000*
Diploma (1 year): Course fee ranges from:
INR 20,000 - 70,000°
Undergraduate (3 - 4 years): Course fee ranges
SCHOLARSHIPS from: INR 30,000 — 1,50,000*
- National Scholarship Portal - Visit Postgraduate (2 years): Course fee ranges from:
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there INR 50,000 - 2,50,000
are Central Government schemes offered by “These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and to Institute.
State Schemes’. —
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
based on merit’. Le tee .
. yo: . « No specific certification is required.
(Availability of these scholarships can vary from A Diol in Loaistics. T; M
time to time) ° iploma in Logistics, Transport Management,
Public Administration, or Railway Operations can
LOANS be helpful to understand the basics of railway
. . ; oo. traffic management. This is not mandatory but
° “wiehyelelsima, ELISA LS NEL ELT THE) so can provide useful background knowledge.
portal for students seeking education loan. This . ow ,
5 « A Bachelor's degree in any discipline from a
portal has been developed under the guidance of ized uni ye d
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of government-recognized university is mandatory
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks to appear for the UPSC Civil Services
Association (IBA). Examination. Degrees in disciplines such as
- Some states have student credit cards with low Public Administration, Economics, Political .
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Science, or Transport Management can provide
Bihar, etc. relevant knowledge for administrative roles in
« All banks give education loans. the Indian Railways.
+ Although not required, a Master's degree in
Transport Management, Public Administration,
Logistics, Public Policy, or Railway Management
@®. can provide advanced knowledge and
= specialized skills, which may be beneficial during
f~ the interview stage and in your role as an officer.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
'e" EXPECTED INCOME
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
s§4 The approx. salary of an IRTS officer ranges
between INR 56,100 - 2,18,200° or more per
month _
QD Source: htips;//testbook.com/ias-preparation/irts-in- ° °
dian-railway-traffic-service "+ (993

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: Indian Railways and other
Government departments/ministries. Tp
Work Environment: Your job role will need you to EXPECTED GROWTH PATH
work both indoors and outdoors. You will be visiting Assistant Divisional Traffic Manager >
warehouses and loco sheds. You will handle a team of Divisional Traffic Manager — Senior Divisional
officials. You are likely to work 5 to 6 days a week Traffic Manager — Deputy Chief Operations
and 8 to 9 hours every day. Manager —>Chief Operations Manager —>
.. . oe use Principal Chief Operations Manager >
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. Member Tratfic, Railway Board
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. University College of Engineering, Osmania University, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Central Institute of Tool Design, Hyderabad, Telangana
3. Central Tool Room and Training Centre, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
4. Khwaja Moinuddin Chishti Language University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
5. College of Engineering, Vadakara, Kerala
6. College of Engineering, Pathanapuram, Kerala
7. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
8. Defence Institute of Advanced Technology, Pune, Maharashtra
9. Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University, New Delhi
10. Veer Surendra Sai University of Technology, Burla, Odisha
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
*(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC before applying)
1. SRM University Chennai, Tamil Nadu EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
2. PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu . . .
. . ep . Ajay Shukla is a senior officer of 1979
3. Lovely Professional University, Jalandhar, Punjab . : . .
aR or batch of Indian Railway Traffic Service
4. Bharati Vidyapeeth Deemed University College of Engineering, Pune, (IRTS). Currently, he is an Additional
ilievee nase Member (Commercial) Railway Board.
5. School of Engineering and Technology, Jain University, Bengluru, Shukla has done his Bachelor's in Science
Karnataka and Master's in History from the
6. Bannari Amman Institute of Technology, Sathyamangalam, Tamil Nadu University of Lucknow.”
7. Amrita School of Engineering, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
8. Dr. DY Patil Institute of Technology, Pune, Maharashtra Source: hitps://www.indianbureaucra-
9. Karunya University, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu cy.com/ajay-shuk-
10. Rajalakshmi Engineering College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu la-takes-charge-as-new-member-traffic-
railway-board
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - /
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html “The above information ts for training purposes
only and will not be used for any commercial
594 gains.

An Indian Revenue Service (IRS) Officer is a civil servant in India responsible for administering and managing the
country's tax laws. They work under the Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) or Central Board of Indirect Taxes
and Customs (CBIC), depending on their specific role.
we
PERSONALITY TRAITS Wy.
« You are an ambitious person.
« You like trying to help people solve their problems.
« You are quick to take on new responsibilities. —
— | COURSE FEE
EA
Certificate (6 months — 1 year): Course fee ranges
from: 10,000 - 50,000*

SCHOLARSHIPS Diploma (1 year): Course fee ranges from:

¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit INR 20,000 — 70,000"
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there Undergraduate (3 - 4 years): Course fee ranges
are Central Government schemes offered by from: INR 30,000 — 1,50,000°
different SPST S, UGC/AICTE Schemes and Postgraduate (2 years): Course fee ranges from:
State Schemes’. INR 50,000 - 2,50,000°

« Scholarships are also available in the institutes ; ; ; ;

“ae “These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
based on merit’. to Institute

"(Availability of these scholarships can vary from

time to time)

[=}, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY

LOANS (2

« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, isa - No specific certification is required.
portal for students seeking education loan. This « A diploma in fields like Public Administration,
portal has been developed under the guidance of Finance, or Taxation can provide helpful insights
iin Dejpeniumien! au -lneinetel SENSES, (unas) a into administrative functions and financial
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks ;

2 systems. Though not mandatory, such diplomas
Association (IBA).
; ; can add value.

. Some states have student credit cards with low » A Bachelor's degree in any discipline from a
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, zed uni we d f
Bihar. etc. recognized university is mandatory to appear tor
Alls ‘ ks ai Aueciion| the UPSC Civil Services Examination.

: OnKs gIVe eaveaTion loans. « While not required, a Master's degree in

relevant fields such as Economics, Finance,
Taxation, or Law can deepen your knowledge
and be advantageous during service.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
Fa EXPECTED INCOME
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of an IRS officer ranges

rs between INR 56,100 — 2,25,000* or more per
month.

_D Source: https;//www.studyig.com/articles/irs-sala-
ry /#:~:tex- _
t=What%20is%20the%20salary%200f,2%2C25%2C00 .« -
0%20per%20month an

Where will you work?

Places of Work: They work in Income Tax offices

throughout India. They also work in other Tax collection EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7

related offices in Central Government and State . _

Covenant Giese. Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax >

. . . , Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax — Joint

Work Environment: You will be working in an office set-up. Commissioner of Income Tax — Additional

You will handle a team of officials. Local travel is likely to GOTT TOTO CO TONE Conn TOnch

be a part of the job profile. It is a transferrable job. You are of Income Tax —> Principal Commissioner of

likely to work 5 to 6 days a week and 8 to 9 hours every Income Tax — Chief Commissioner of Income

day. Tax — Principal Chief Commissioner of Income

r.

Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. os

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration

(LBSNAA), Mussoorie, Uttarakhand
2. National Academy of Direct Taxes (NADT), Nagpur,
Maharashtra

3. Indian Institute of Public Administration (IIPA), New Delhi

PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS

‘(To be checked with UGC and AICTE for its affiliation and accreditation)

1. Chanakya IAS Academy, Multiple Locations in India

2. Vajiram and Ravi IAS Institute, New Delhi

3. Drishti IAS Academy, New Delhi

4. ALS IAS Coaching, Multiple Locations in India

5. Vision IAS, Multiple Locations in India

Information on the institute rankings can be found at -

www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Indian Revenue Service (IRS) officer Nitin
Gupta is currently the chairman of the
Central Board of Direct Taxes. Gupta
belongs to the 1986 batch of the Income
Tax cadre. He has a Bachelor's in Civil
Engineering from Malviya National Institute
of Technology, Jaipur.”
Source:hitps;//www.ndtv.com/india-news/r
evenue-service-officer-nitin-gupta-is-new-ce
ntral-board-of-direct-taxes-chairman-3 103
951
*The above information is for training purposes only
and will not be used for any commercial gains.

596

An Inspector of Income Tax is a government official working within the Income Tax Department of India, which is part
of the Ministry of Finance. The primary role of an Income Tax Inspector is to enforce and ensure compliance with the
country's income tax laws and regulations. This position is crucial for maintaining the integrity of the tax system, de-
tecting tax evasion, and ensuring that individuals and businesses pay their fair share of taxes.
Marx
PERSONALITY TRAITS ®.
« You are quick to take on new responsibilities.
+ You like to do puzzles.
+ You like to work in teams.
+ You like to have clear instructions to follow.
FEES
=, COURSE FEE
oY
ogee, ARS TE The approx. course fee ranges between
INR 68,000 - 2,00,000°
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there “These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
are Central Government schemes offered by to Institute.
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’. =
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
. naa wih holarshi f « No specific certification is required.
(Greilclellny Ghose Saneleren/ps Gel Wen arena - A diploma in fields like Public Administration,
time to time) . . . aor
Finance, or Taxation can provide helpful insights
LOANS into administrative functions and financial
; . -_ systems. Though not mandatory, such diplomas
. Mel rahi Sh i etal a is <i, can add value.
prointelhtetr ane lcs Sexe ding; CtelBeetrre Kexetn Uns « A Bachelor's degree in any discipline from a
portal has been developed under the guidance of ised uni iy datory ¢ f
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of recognized UNIVEFSITY IS MANGATOFY TO APPEar Tor
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks the SSC CGL Examination.
Association (IBA). ¢ While not required, a Master's degree in
+ Some states have student credit cards with low relevant fields such as Economics, Finance,
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Taxation, or Law can deepen your knowledge
Bihar, etc. and be advantageous during service.
> All banks give education loans. Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
\ dd
len EXPECTED INCOME
“The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of an Inspector of Income Tax
ranges between INR 45,000 — 72,000* per
month.
Source: htips://www.glassdoor.co.in/Salaries/in- _—
a= spector-salary-SRCH_KOO,9.htm o
ull @ =

Where will you work?

Places of Work: Offices of the CBDT (Central Board of

Direct T .

rect Taxes) EXPECTED GROWTH PATH «(7

Work Environment: You will work in an office set up. Local Income Tax Inspector — Income Tax Officer >

travel is a part of the job profile as you will be travelling to Assistant Commissioner —> Deputy

places to make inquiries. You are likely to work 5 to 6 days Commissioner > Additional/Joint

a week and 8 to 9 hours every day. Commissioner —> Commissioner — Principal

Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. oe ~

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. National Academy of Direct Taxes (NADT), Nagpur,

Maharashtra
2. Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI), New Delhi
3. National Institute of Public Finance and Policy (NIPFP), New
Delhi

4. Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT), New Delhi

PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS

1. Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), Mumbai, Maharashtra

2. Pearson Professional, Mumbai, Maharashtra

3. Career Power, New Delhi

4. IMS Learning Resources, Mumbai, Maharashtra
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Manju Bala is an Indian track and field
athlete who competes in hammer throw. She
secured the first position in the 2022
National Inter-State Senior Athletics
Championships, Chennai. When not wielding
a hammer, Bala, who is from Churu,
Rajasthan, is an Income Tax Inspector. She is
the recipient of the Maharana Pratap Award
(2012-13)."
Source:htip;//bit.ly/3JopIRJ
“The above information is for training purposes only
and will not be used for any commercial gains.

598

The ITBP or Indo-Tibetan Border Police is a wing of the central armed police force specialising in high-
altitude operations. The main role of an ITBP officer is to preserve peace and security in the border of India and Tibet
which extends from Ladakh all the way to Myanmar, as well as prevent cross border
crimes such as smuggling.
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’. [=), EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
* Scholarships are also available in the institutes eee
based on merit’. 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream, preferably the
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Science stream (Physics, Chemistry and
time to time) Mathematics).
2. Complete a Bachelor's degree in any stream or
(B.Tech/B.E./B.Sc.) in any Engineering course
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a for Engineering Services of ITBP.
portal for students seeking education loan. This 3A for ITBP itment E Conduct b
portal has been developed under the guidance of UPSC or recrunimenr exam soncuerey
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of .
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks Lo, . .
Association (IBA). For admission into the Engineering course, you
5 jales A tudent credit cards with low must clear examinations such as JEE Advanced,
ae N SMES AEOMME 1 Moin, MET, VITEE, MT CET, SROVE,
. ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ COMEDK, UGET, KCET and so on.
Bihar, etc.
» All banks give education loans. Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
; ‘ —
599

Where will you work?
Places of Work : You can find employment in the ITBP and
become a part of the force of 60 Battalions with 15
Sectors and 05 Frontiers. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH Tes
Work Environment : The work timings are typically 6 to 7 Assistant Commandant — Deputy
days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is Commandant — Commandant > Deputy
applicable. You are expected to deal with challenging Inspector General (DIG) > Inspector
situations. Most of the work is outdoors. General (IG) > Additional Director
General (ADG) — Special Director
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field. General > Director General (DG)
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy (SVPNPA), Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA), Mussoorie, Uttarakhand
3. Indira Gandhi National Forest Academy (IGNFA), Dehradun, Uttarakhand
4. CAPF Academy, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
1. Chanakya IAS Academy, New Delhi
2. Vajiram and Ravi, New Delhi
3. ALS IAS Academy, Bengaluru, Karnataka
4. Shankar IAS Academy, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
5. Khan Study Group (KSG), Patna, Bihar
Cont > — 6 EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Z
iy Wy y Prakriti - After the government allowed
<3 women officers in the ITBP in 2016, Prakriti
‘ (\ cleared the UPSC exam for officers'
) Sa recruitment in CAPFs in the same year and
in her first attempt. She is
az, expected to be commissioned as an
Assistant Commandant (AC) next year in
Ss = the force after she completes her training at
Su Dehradun.”
S Source:
-™~ . ndtv.com/india-news/in-a-first-itbp-inducts
uy -two-women-officers-in-combat-2505635
@ ‘The above information is for training purposes only
600 and will not be used for any commercial gains.

A Loco Pilot is a train driver responsible for operating and controlling locomotives. They ensure safe and timely train
operations by managing speed, braking, and responding to emergencies. The role requires technical expertise and
adherence to safety protocols.
We
PERSONALITY TRAITS Ww.
« You like working outdoors.
« You like to lead.
+ You like to have clear instructions to follow.
FEES
=, COURSE FEE
?
SCHOLARSHIPS Certificate (6 months - 1 year): Course fee ranges
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit from: 10,000 — 50,000*
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there Diploma (1 year): Course fee ranges from:
are Central Government schemes offered by INR 20.000 - 70.000*
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and ‘ ‘
State Schemes’. Undergraduate (3 - 4 years): Course fee ranges
. . . — from: INR 30,000 — 1,50,000°
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes
based on merit’. Postgraduate (2 eels)! Course fee ranges from: INR
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from 30,000 — 2,00,000
time to time) “These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
to Institute.
LOANS
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
portal for students seeking education loan. This © vreeecrssnresecsnneerecesnnece
portal has been developed under the guidance of - No specific certification is required.
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of « A Diploma in Mechanical Engineering, Electrical
finance), wish of Education and Indian Banks Engineering, or Railway Transport can be
sociation (IB) beneficial to understand the basic concepts of
« Some states have student credit cards with low locomotives and train operations.
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, + Bachelor's degree in Mechanical Engineering
Bihar, etc. Electrical Engineering, or Railway Engineering
» All banks give education loans. from a government-recognized university is
essential.
« While not required, a Master's degree in fields
like Railway Engineering, Mechanical
Engineering, or Electrical Engineering can
@ provide advanced knowledge that may be
beneficial in the career.
_~ A Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
EXPECTED INCOME
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of a Loco Pilot ranges
between INR 20,000 - 60,000* per month
Vv Source:hitps://www.glassdoor.co.in/Salaries/loco
-pilot-salary-SRCH_KOO, 1 0.him ee
QD ° 601

Where will you work?
Places of Work: Indian Railways.
Work Environment: It is a field job. Local travel is an EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
important part of the job profile. It is a transferrable job. Assistant Loco Pilot Loco Pilot > Senior
You are likely to work 5 to 6 days a week and 8 to 9 hours Loco Pilot Loco Foreman —> Station Head
every day.
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
]. Indian Railways Institute of Mechanical and Electrical
Engineering (IRIMEE), Jamalpur, Bihar
2. Railway Training Institute (RTI), Kapurthala, Punjab
3. National Academy of Indian Railways (NAIR), Vadodara,
Gujarat
PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS
1. All India Railway Recruitment Board Coaching Institutes,
Various locations in India
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Minu Mubaraka C from Kerala is an Assistant
Loco Pilot in the South Western Railway Zone.
She has an M.Tech. in Electrical and
Communications Engineering and cleared the
Railway Recruitment Board's Assistant Loco
Pilot exam following it.”
Source:http://bit.ly/3Hgqckv
*The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains.
602

A Merchant Navy Officer is a professional who works on commercial ships, responsible for the safe and efficient op-
eration of the vessel. They manage various aspects of navigation, cargo handling, and the ship's overall functioning.
Merchant Navy officers are involved in overseeing the safety of passengers and crew, as well as ensuring compli-
ance with international shipping regulations. They are trained to operate ships, manage marine operations, and
handle emergencies while at sea.
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’.
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes
based on merit’.
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
time to time) D vrssessssssssesssseesseeesseens
* No specific certification is required.
« A Diploma in Nautical Science, Marine
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Engineering, or related fields can be pursued
portal for students seeking education loan. This after completing 10+2 with Physics, Chemistry,
portal has been developed under the guidance of and Mathematics.
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of . . . .
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks 7A Bachelor's degree in Nautical Science, Marine
Association (IBA). Engineering, or any related field is typically
+ Some states have student credit cards with low eae’ This is Pursved aren completing 1042
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, (with Science subjects) and passing the
eifysle. Cite. necessary entrance exams.
» All banks give education loans. . Although not mandatory, a Master's degree in
Marine Engineering, Nautical Science, or
CR, Shipping Management can further enhance
—_ one’s expertise in the field and open up
; A O advanced career opportunities.
. = = | | | | + Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
=i: Tieecaly
- “esi
|
- ee ee s
See e eee ee es 03

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Commercial Sector of the mari-
time industry, including Passenger Vessels, Cargo EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
Carriers, Oil and Gas Tankers. Chief Officer/Mate — Second Officer/
Work Environment: You will soend a substantial Mate — Third Officer/Mate — Deck Cadet
amount of time away from home at sea. You will OR
be working in harsh weather condition. You will Chics cagiieer = Seaend] Exalinesn /
not have a 9 to 5 routine but work in shifts. You . . . . .
likely to head a team First Assistant Engineer — Third Engineer/
are IIKeIY TO Neaa a : Second Assistant Engineer — Fourth
. ; eee Engineer/Third Assistant Engineer >
o} tunities for differently abled exist in this field. .
PO CL Fifth Engineer/Engine Cadet — Electrical
officer (ETO)
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The courses are offered by the Department of
Science and Technology.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Maritime University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. T.S. Chanakya, Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra
3. Indian Maritime University, Mumbai, Maharashtra
4. Indian Maritime University, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Indian Maritime University, Kochi, Kerala
6. Maritime Training Institute (MTI), Mumbai, Maharashtra
7. Central Institute of Fisheries Nautical and Engineering
Training, Kochi, Kerala
8. Mumbai University, Mumbai, Maharashtra
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC before
applying)
1. Tolani Maritime Institute, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Hindustan Institute of Maritime Training, Chennai, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
Tamil Nadu Radhika Menon is the first woman captain of
a. Academy of Maritime Education and Training, Chennai, the Indian Merchant Navy team. In 2015, she
Tamil Nadu created a new record as being the first woman
4. VELS School of Maritime Studies, Chennai, Tamil Nadu in the world to receive the Exceptional Bravery
5. Hindustan Institute of Maritime Training Collage, Chennai, at Sea award, for her outstanding
Tamil Nadu performance and dedication to the Merchant
6. International Maritime Institute, Greater Noida, Navy. After completing her Class 12, Menon
Uttar Pradesh enrolled in the All India Marine College in Kochi
7. Indian Maritime University, Kolkata, West Bengal for a radio course for one-and-a-half VAaclico
8. Praveenya Institute of Marine Engineering and Maritime She alles the marine industry as a radio
Studies, Vizianagaram, Andhra Pradesh officer.
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - Source: htips://sirthomasliptonfounda-
http;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html tion.org/treasure-seekers/radhi-
ka-menon-captain-on-the-bridge/
‘The above information is for training purposes only and
604 will not be used for any commercial gains.

A Police Constable is a police officer of the lowest grade. The person is responsible for maintaining the law and
order in his beat. He or she also serves summons and warrants, arrests criminals, controls traffic and guards important
government establishments and property.
Fe
PERSONALITY TRAITS W.
« You are a careful and organized person.
+ You like helping people.
+ You like to have clear instructions to follow.
FEES
=, COURSE FEE
?
Certificate: Course fee ranges from:
SCHOLARSHIPS INR 10,000 - 50,000*
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit Diploma: Course fee ranges from:
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there INR 20,000 — 70,000*
are Central Government schemes offered by Undergraduate: Course fee ranges from:
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and INR 30,000 - 1,50,000*
state schemes : ; ; | Postgraduate: Course fee ranges from:
¢ Scholarships are also available in the institutes INR 50,000 — 2,50,000*
based on merit’.
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary rom an an are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
time to time)
[=}, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
LOANS DO liectecseteteseeteteseseseeees
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a ¢ No specific certification is required.
portal for students seeking education loan. This A Diol in Law Enf + Publi
portal has been developed under the guidance of . iproma in Law eEnrorcement, Tupic
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Administration, or Criminal Justice can be helpful
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks to understand the basics of police work, but it is
Association (IBA). not mandatory.
« Some states have student credit cards with low ¢ A Bachelor's degree in any discipline from a
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, recognized university is typically required.
Bihar, etc. Degrees in fields such as Political Science, Law,
« All banks give education loans. or Criminal Justice are beneficial for
understanding legal systems and law
enforcement practices.
« Although not required, a Master's degree in
@© Public Administration, Criminal Justice, or Law
can provide advanced knowledge in law
enforcement, public safety, and governance.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
EXPECTED INCOME
aa ‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
ee, &-
\ The approx. salary of a Police Constable ranges
between INR 20,000 — 34,000* or more per
Y month.
Source: https://www.glassdoor.co.in/Salaries/po- se
QD lice-constable-salary-SRCH_KOO, 16.htm _
e « 605

Where will you work?

Places of Work: State governments.

Work Environment: It is a field job. Local travel is an EXPECTED GROWTH PATH f~/

important part of this job profile. Police stations usually

work for 7 days a week and 24 hours every day. This may Police Constable — Senior Police Constable —

vary from police station to police station. It is hence likely Head Constable —> Assistant Sub-Inspector of

that you will be working in shifts. Police — Sub-Inspector — Inspector of Police

Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field .

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy

(SVPNPA), Hyderabad, Telangana

2. Central Police Training Institute (CPTI), Hyderabad, Telangana

PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS

1. Paramount Coaching Centre, New Delhi

2. Bharat Police Academy, Jaipur, Rajasthan

3. Rao IIT Academy, Mumbai, Maharashtra
EXAMPLE FROMTHE FIELD [J
Constable Meena Ghodke is from Beed,
Maharashtra. She is currently a part of the
district anti-human trafficking unit. Ghodke is
the first person from her village to have risen
to the position of a constable in her village.
With a desire to do something in her life, she
appeared for the police recruitment exam
after she completed her Class 12.*
Source:https;//www.reuters.com/article/us-i
ndia-women-police-idUSKCN 1TZ1ZZ
“The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains.

606

The Railway Protection Force, commonly referred as RPF, is one of the top security forces of India. The primary job
of RPF is to ensure protection of the passengers and their properties. They also look after the safety of the railway
property and ensure no damage is done to it.
-* *
PERSONALITY TRAITS Ww.
+ You like helping people.
+ You are physically fit
» You pay attention to details
* You like to work in a team FEES COURSE FEE
EA
Certificate: Course fee ranges from:
INR 10,000 - 50,000*

SCHOLARSHIPS Diploma: Course fee ranges from:

¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit INR 20,000 — 70,000°
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there Undergraduate: Course fee ranges from:
are Central Government schemes offered by INR 30,000 - 1.50,000°
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and ’ ; —_

State Schemes’. Postgraduate: Course fee ranges from:
. a INR 50,000 - 2,50,000*

« Scholarships are also available in the institutes
based on merit”. “These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute

*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from fo Institute.

time to ti =

ime to time) [= EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY

» VidyaLokshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a * No specific certification is required.
portal for students seeking education loan. This » A diploma in Law Enforcement, Security
portal has been developed under the guidance of Management, or related fields can be helpful for
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of understanding the basics of railway security.
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks Although not mandatory, it can provide useful
Association (IBA). knowledge for the role.

° Some states have student credit cards with low e A Bachelor's degree in any discipline from a
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, recognized university is required to appear for
Bihar, etc. the RPF recruitment exam. Degrees in Law,

+ All banks give education loans. Public Administration, or Security Management

may be beneficial.
mm |_| om * Though not mandatory, a Master's degree in
Law, Public Administration, or Security Studies
can deepen your understanding of security
protocols, which may benefit you during the
bf interview or in service.
« | il. Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
> | =
sallenlemigumylananii EXPECTED INCOME
Eg SNNAVS Sf 4 ‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
= Yaz \ 4 The approx. salary of an employee in RPF ranges
in A ta between INR 27,900 - 52,030* or more per
ee month.
eI Source: https;///www.careerpower.in/blog/rpf-con- _* *
= p P p
J a \ Q stable-salary _
° 607

Where will you work?

Places of work: Indian Railways Services.

Work Environment: You have to work in shifts and travel EXPECTED GROWTH PATH i

regularly. Work hours may increase during peak seasons

RPF Constable — RPF Head Constable — RPF
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. Assistant Sub-Inspector — RPF Sub-Inspector
— RPF Inspector

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This list of institutes Is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Institute of Rail Transport, New Delhi

2. National Academy of Indian Railways, Vadodara, Gujarat

3. Central Railway Training Institute, Pune, Maharashtra

PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS

1. Bharati Vidyapeeth University, Pune, Maharashtra

2. National Institute of Security Management, New Delhi

3. All India Institute of Local Self-Government, Mumbai,

Maharashtra
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Rekha Mishra, an RPF sub-inspector, joined
the force in 2014 at Chhatrapati Shivaji
Terminus, Mumbai. She is recognized for her
efforts in rescuing over 950 runaway and
trafficked children and reuniting them with
their families. Her exemplary work helped
her win the Nari Shakti Puraskar in 2017 for
outstanding contribution to women
empowerment.”
Source:https://www.ndtv.com/offbeat/meet
-the-policewoman-who-has-saved-over-950
-runaway-and-trafficked-kids-2385457
“The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains.
608

A SSB Officer or Sashastra Seema Bal Officer is responsible for guarding India's borders with Nepal and Bhutan. Orig-
inally set up in 1963, the Sashastra Seema Bal mainly deals with preventing cross-border crime and smuggling as well
as other anti-national activities within the confines of the country and its territories.
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by =
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
State Schemes’. seveennnnnnnnnnenssnnnnnnnnnnne .
. . . — ¢ No specific certification is required.
¢ Scholarships are also available in the institutes .
based on merit’. ¢ A Diploma in Law Enforcement, Security
. oy . Management, or related fields can provide
(Availability of these scholarships can vary from _ ; .
+i insights into law enforcement principles and
ime to time) .
practices.
« A Bachelor's degree in any discipline from a
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a recognized university is required to appear for
portal for students seeking education loan. This the SSB recruitment exams. Degrees in fields like
portal has been developed under the guidance of Law, Public Administration, or Criminal Justice are
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of highly relevant for the role.
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks » While not mandatory, a Master's degree in Law,
Association (IBA). Security Studies, Public Administration, or related
« Some states have student credit cards with low fields can be advantageous in strengthening
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, understanding of security, law enforcement, and
Bihar, etc. public administration.
- All banks give education loans.
¢ SSB recruitment generally involves specific
™ physical and mental fitness criteria in addition to
> educational qualifications.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
ye” >
- ; _
Que \ c
609

Where will you work?
Places of Work : You can find employment in various
battalions of the SSB which have several departments such
as Operations and Intelligence, Personnel and Training, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
ca eel Provisioning and Communication, Medical Assistant Commandant — Deputy
ana so on. Commandant — Commandant > Deputy
Work Environment : The work timings are typically 6 to 7 Inspector General (DIG) >
days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is Inspector General (IG) > Additional
applicable. You are expected to deal with challenging Director General (ADG) -> Special
situations. Most of the work is outdoors. Director General > Director General (DG)
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. National Police Academy, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Central Armed Police Forces Training College, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh
3. SSB Academy - Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh
4. Directorate General, Sashastra Seema Bal, New Delhi
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
1. Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), Mumbai, Maharashtra
2. Delhi Police Academy, New Delhi
3. Jaipur Police Academy, Jaipur, Rajasthan
4. Bhartiya Vidhya Bhavan, New Delhi
5. Bhartiya Vidya Mandir, Kolkata, West Bengal
a
“a Wig
rm
, 0
Z ( a 4 a EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
‘ _ \ “Be Archana Ramasundaram - One of the first
gw ee yx fo) women to lead a Central Paramilitary
; 4 y &. Force, Archana Ramasundaram pursued
- her career as a police officer after her
; graduation in Economics from the University
us of Rajasthan. She was appointed as the DG
= of Sashastra Seema Bal on 3rd February,
~ q¢V Cary 2016."
Se ~ Source: hitps;//www.samanyag-
= yan.com/eng/biography-archana-ra-
i masundram
‘The above information is for training purposes only
and will not be used for any commercial gains.
610

SUB-INSPECTOR OF POLICE
A Sub-Inspector (Sl) of Police is a law enforcement officer in charge of managing police stations and conducting
investigations. Sls serve as a middle management rank in police departments, responsible for overseeing and
coordinating various policing tasks, such as investigating crimes, supervising constables, and handling law and order
situations. They report to higher-ranking officers like Inspectors and Deputy Superintendents of Police (DSPs).
Mae
PERSONALITY TRAITS w.
« You are quick to take on new responsibilities.
« You can comfortably talk with all kinds of people. TEES
+ You like to have clear instructions to follow. —) COURSE FEE
[=
Certificate: Course fee ranges from:
INR 10,000 - 50,000*
Diploma: Course fee ranges from:
peal i INR 20,000 - 70,000*
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit . .
; : Undergraduate: Course fee ranges from:
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there *
INR 30,000 - 1,50,000
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and Postgraduate: Course fee ranges from:
State Schemes”. INR 50,000 - 2,50,000*

« Scholarships are also available in the institutes ‘These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute
based on merit”. to Institute.

*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from —

(evar time) P Y Ej, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY

LOANS « No specific certification is required.

- VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is 0 » A Diploma in Law Enforcement, Police _
portal for students seeking education loan. This Administration, or related fields can provide
portal has been developed under the guidance of valuable insights into the functioning of police
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of departments and help in preparing for the
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks competitive exams.

Association (IBA). ; . ae
; ; + A Bachelor's degree in any discipline is

+ Some states have student credit cards with low mandatory for appearing in the police
IENESU rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, recruitment exams for Sub-Inspector. Degrees in
Bihar, etc. . : . .

; Law, Criminology, or Public Administration may

* All banks give education loans. provide a relevant foundation for the role.

« Although not required, a Master's degree in
(O} Criminology, Law, Public Administration, or
related fields can enhance your knowledge in
law enforcement and may benefit you during
<4... training and interviews.
_ Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
Ga EXPECTED INCOME
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of Sub-Inspector of Police
ranges between INR 35,000 — 71,000* per
——> month.
Source: https;///www.glassdoor.co.in/Salaries/sub-in-  ° °
spector-salary-SRCH_KOO, 13.him _
QD Ce 3 |

Where will you work?

Places of Work: Police stations.

Work Environment: Your job role will need you to work EXPECTED GROWTH PATH Ts

both indoors and outdoors. Local travel is a part of the job ; ;

profile as you will have to be present at the site of incident Sub-Inspector, Police — Inspector of Police —

and take necessary action. It is a transferrable job. You are Assistant/Deputy Superintendent of Police —

likely to work 6 days a week and 8 to 9 hours every day. Additional Superintendent of Police —

You may have to work weekends and longer hours if the Superintendent of Police — Senior

cituction caimcnek. Superintendent of Police — Deputy Inspector

General of Police — Inspector General of
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field. Police — Additional Director General of Police
— Director General of Police

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. National Police Academy (NPA), Hyderabad, Telangana

2. Indian Police Academy, New Delhi

3. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel National Police Academy,

Hyderabad, Telangana

4. State Police Training Academies, Various locations in India

PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS

1. Indian Police Institute, New Delhi

2. R.K. Sharma Academy, New Delhi

3. Chanakya Academy, Jaipur, Rajasthan

4. Paramount Coaching Centre, New Delhi
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Vijaya Laxmi Devi was Odisha's first and
India's third woman Sub-Inspector. She
belonged to the Dhenkanal district and had
joined the state police force in 1962. She did
her graduation from the Ravenshaw
University, Cuttack.”
Source:http;//bit.ly/3kOqmYU
“The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains.

612

x 6 DNS
a
NEES,
(.) a
Information Technology -
A »)
ILI «S|
= 5
~~ LI oe”

2 6 BXS
KAS
[| °& @
a ee
Pe \
p29
[\ ce
W \
|] oo]
EE
= 16 ¥

Artificial intelligence engineers use Al and machine learning techniques to develop applications and
systems. They help organisations to perform more efficiently and in the process increases their profit
margins.
- There are a few engineering-specific scholarships, such [= EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
as IndusInd Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan OD verre rertenseeereceees
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar 1. Complete 10+2 in Science stream (Physics,
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of Chemistry and Mathematics)
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022, NTPC Scholarship 2. Complete Bachelor"s in Artificial Intelligence/
Scheme 2022, Foundation for Excellence Scholarship Mathematics/Statistics/
2022, RD Sethna Loan Scholarship. For more you can visit Computer Science/Information Technology
the below-mentioned websites: OR
+ Please visit www.scholarships.gov.in for all latest C lete Diol in Aland Machine L .
details. This will take you to the National Scholarship omplere wiproma in Aran ening Learning
Portal. Under this portal there are central government OR :
schemes offered by different departments, UGC/AICTE Complete Bachelor's degree then do a Master's in
Schemes and State Schemes. Computer Science & Engineering/ Artificial
Intelligence/Machine Learning/ Robotics
+ Scholarships are made available by institutes / Avionics/Electronics/Electronics & Communication
themselves based on merit.” Engineering/Data Science/ Data
Engineering/Information Science &
*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) Engineering/Electrical Signal Processing/
Computer Networking/Applied Linguistics/
Computational Linguistics and allied fields
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for OR .
students seeking education loan. This portal has been Complete Bachleor’s degree in
developed under the guidance of the Department of Mathematics/Statistics/Computer
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of Science/Information Technology and then do an
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian online certificate course related to Artificial
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and Intelligence
track the education loan applications on the website.
« Some states have student credit cards with low interest For admissions, you must qualify entrance
ilies, Wel nsvelies, Wes) Beuigiell, Otelsue,, EINEh, He: examination conducted at the national level (JEE
> Al bens civeceuestiiontoans. Main, JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
_—— EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.)
A & , ia .
fe eo ac a f Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
i 2 : *., Cc nC 7
rrr ©

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
—
This course is offered by the Department of Computer Science. > a
This list of institutes is indicative only , iS
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES -_
1.Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, Karnataka <>
2. University College of Engineering, Osmania University,
Hyderabad, Telangana
3. Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad, Telangana 5 KC
4. \Indian Institute of Information Technology, Bengaluru, Karnataka <>
5. Delhi Technological University, New Delhi
6. Indian Institutes of Information Technology, New Delhi
7. University Institute of Engineering and Technology, Kanpur,
Uttar Pradesh
8. Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur, Rajasthan
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying) EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
1. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu
2. SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Chengalpattu,
Tamil Nadu
3. Symbiosis Institute of Technology, Pune, Maharashtra
4. Bangalore Institute of Technology, Bengaluru, Karnataka
5. Jamia Hamdard University, New Delhi
6. Christ University, Bengaluru, Karnataka
7. Haldia Institute of Technology, Haldia, West Bengal
616

Augmented Reality is a technology which allows a person to see virtual components (such as text, images and so on)
in the real world. This technology is typically used in the gaming industry. An Augmented Reality Engineer makes use
of technology to create an augmented reality environment.
= =
rd e
‘ U
q ww
h A
a | wy
—_ ‘

¢ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship - De

This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first —_—

year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility ee

includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the a

Government of India for economically backward ee

students who have a strong aptitude for scientific

research.”

¢ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000

such engineering scholarships are awarded by the

Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees

of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this

scheme. *

+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship - The IOC Ltd ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY

offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible students. 1. Complete 10 +2 in the Science stream (Physics

Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate . . ,

course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students Chemistry and Mathematics).

with physical disabilities, women and students from North

East and J&K." 2. Complete Bachelors degree (B.Tech.) in

Computer Science and Engineering/ B.Sc. in Virtual

+ Visit www.scholarships.gov.in the National Scholarship and Augmented Reallity.

Portal. Under this portal there are central government

schemes offered by different departments, UGC/AICTE For admissions, you must qualify entrance

Schemes and State Schemes.” examination conducted at the national level (JEE

. . _. Main, JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP

* Scholarships are made available by institutes EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.).

themselves based on merit. '

‘(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) Please check the duration of the course during enrolment

¢ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for

students seeking education loan. This portal has been o-

developed under the guidance of the Department of

Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of

Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian

Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and

track the education loan applications on the website.

+ Some states have student credit cards with low interest

rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.

+ All banks give education loans. _

617

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Computer Science
and Engineering
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES €
1. Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, Tamil Nadu rm /
2. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
3. Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati, Assam
4. Periyar University, Salem, Tamil Nadu
5. Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur, Rajasthan
6. Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee, Haryana
7. International Institute of Information Technology, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
PRIVATE INSTITUTES ~~
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC
and AICTE before applying)
1. NorthCap University, Gurgaon, Haryana
2. Chandigarh University, Punjab
3. Presidency University, Bangalore, Karnataka EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
4. Chitkara University, Himachal Pradesh
5. Lingaya's Vidyyapeeth, Faridabad, Uttar Pradesh
6. Birla Institute of Technology Mesra, Jaipur, Rajasthan
618

Big data analytics is the use of advanced analytic techniques for collecting, examining, and analysing large
amounts of data. It is used to discover market trends, insights, and patterns. It helps companies make more
informed decisions in the management of their organisation.
Pe) _
e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
¢ Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000 Ez EDUCATIONAL : PATHWAY
va engineering scholarships are awarded by the 1. Complete 10+2 in Science stream (Physics,
inistry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees . .
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this Chemistry and Mathematics)
scheme.* 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (BSc/BCA/
B Tech) in IT/ Data Science/ Computational
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship - The IOC Ltd Engineering
offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible students. OR
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate Complete Bachelor's degree and follow it up wirh
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students Master's in the same discipline
with physical disabilities, women and students from North OR
Bess elneliels, Pursue diploma or certification at post graduation
¢ Visit www.scholarships.gov.in the National Scholarship level
Portal. Under this portal there are central government
schemes offered by different departments, UGC/AICTE Entrance
Schemes and State Schemes.” While several institutes offer big data analytics
courses on the basis of 10+2 results, some
+ Scholarships are made available by institutes institutes conduct common entrance tests for the
themselves based on merit.” admission
*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of le.
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
« Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
+ All banks give education loans.
» | 619

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
‘%
Zi4, KG,
Ate
This course is offered by the Department of Computer and OA : Ht
Information Science e Lap 5 !
This list of institutes is indicative only g g a y)
Ale a eo
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES f, _
1. Indian Institutes of Management, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh ~ » pam,
2. Indian Institutes of Management, Calcutta, Kalkata, West sae
Bengal ®
3. Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
A. Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, Karnataka
5. Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
6. Annamalai University, Annamalai Nagar, Tamil Nadu
7. Chandigarh College of Engineering and Technology,
Chandigarh
8. Bharathiar University, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before
applying)
1. SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Presidency University, Bengaluru, Karnataka
3. Indian School of Business Management and Administration,
New Delhi
A. Institute of Good Manufacturing Practices India, New Delhi
5. Acharya Nagarjuna University, Nagarjun Nagar, Andhra
Pradesh
6. Loyola Academy, Hyderabad, Telangana
7. Sathyabama Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu
620

A blockchain is a type of database used to store and organize information. This technology allows
businesses to conduct secure transactions without involving third parties. Blockchain Developers build,
maintain, and design blockchain applications and systems.
Mar
PERSONALITY TRAITS WW. c
« You are good with computers.
+ You like to analyse problems/situations. |
« You pay attention to details while working. ~
« You are comfortable with working in a team. il
| | vu
SCHOLARSHIPS
| ees | COURSE FEE
: Engineering specific scholarships ~ You can opt eC, The approx. course fee ranges between
for engineering-specific scholarships such as INR 20,000 — 520.000"
IndusInd Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan ’ “ee
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar “(The above mentioned figures are approximate numbers.
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of This will vary from Institute to Institute)
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on.”
« National Scholarship Portal - Please visit
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
are Central Government schemes offered by
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
State Schemes.” Chemistry and Mathematics)
2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
- Scholarships are also available in the Institutes (B.Tech/B.Sc./B.E.) in Computer Science and
based on merit.” Engineering Blockchain Technology
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from OR
time to time) Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
Master's degree (M.Tech/M.Sc./M.E.) in the same
LOANS field
OR
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
portal for students seeking education loan. This Master's degree (MBA) in Process
portal has been developed under the guidance of automation/Blockchain.
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and EE
track the education loan applications on the
website PP | EXPECTED INCOME |
« Some states have student credit cards with low | The figures are indicative & subject fo change
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, | The approx. salary of a Blockchain
Bihar, etc. :' Developer ranges between INR 20,000 -
+ All banks give education loans. | 4,17,000" per month
| Source: https:;//www.payscale.com/re- ce
| search/IN/Skill=Blockchain_Technology/Salary ioe
Q Coonan ananassae 62

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You can work in several IT companies
across the country or overseas.
Junior Blockchain Developer > Senior
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to Blockchain Developer >
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is Principal Blockchain Developer
applicable.
Entrepreneurship: You can pursue freelancing in this
field as well as start your own company.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics
Statistics and Computer Science, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivikasi, Tamil Nadu
3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi
4. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences,
New Delhi
6. College of Applied Science, Kundara Kollam, Kerala
7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan
8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal
9. Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
2. Indian Institute of Information Technology, Vadodara, Gujarat
3. Kerala University of Digital Sciences Innovation Manju Mohan is the CEO and Co-Founder
. of lonixx Technologies, a tech company.
and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala Mohan holds a Bachelor's degree in
4. Lovely Professional University, Phagwara, Punjab Computer Science and Economics from the
5. The NorthCap University, Gurgaon, Haryana University of Western Ontario (Canada)
6. Samrat Ashok Technological Institute, Vidisha, Madhya Pradesh and a Master's degree in Instructional
7. Shanmugha Arts Science Technology Research Academy, Design from San Francisco state University.
; ; She is skilled in User Experience Design and
Thanjavar, Tamil Nadu well versed in Blockchain technology. She
8. SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Chengalpattu, Tamil Nadu currently resides in Irvine, California.”
9. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan
10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka Source - wef.org.in/manju-mohan/
11. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu ‘The above information is for training purposes
620 12. Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala, Punjab cane will not be used for any commercial

A Cloud Engineer is an IT professional responsible for all the technical aspects related to cloud
computing, that is defined as the delivery of computing services over the internet (‘the cloud’) to offer
faster innovation, and more flexible resources.
PERSONALITY TRAITS W. rh 2
« You are good with computers. SZ I
« You like to analyse problems/situations. ee
- You pay attention to details while working. —S “~~
- You are comfortable with communicating with others. . la i
SCHOLARSHIPS : / y
« Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt
for engineering-specific scholarships such as
Indusind Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of FEES COURSE FEE
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on.” RC, The approx. course fee ranges between
INR 45,000 — 10,00,000*
« National Scholarship Portal - Please visit “(The above mentioned figures are approximate numbers.
a reed ue aa there This will vary from Institute to Institute)
are Central Government schemes offered by
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes.”
¢ Scholarships are also available in the Institutes ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
based on merit.” ; ;
1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
"(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Chemistry and Mathematics)
time to time) 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
(B.Tech/B.Sc./BCA/B.E.) in Computer
LOANS Science/Information System
OR
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
portal for students seeking education loan. This Master's degree (M.Tech/M.Sc./MCA/M.E,) in the
portal has been developed under the guidance of same field
ue vay Minn of ene mane  Meimstry of Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
inance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and FC
icati th !
iionie education loan applications on the | EXPECTED INCOME |
“The fi indicative & subject to ch |
¢ Some states have student credit cards with low OG iN PSELIVES DISS |
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, The approx. salary of a Cloud Engineer ranges
Bihar, etc. : between INR 22,750 - 1,67,000* per month
¢ All banks give education loans. Source: https://www.payscale.com/
| research/IN/Job=Cloud_Solutions_
‘| Engineer/Salary
<i a 623

WHERE WILL YOU WORK

Places of Work: You can work at tech companies or EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7"

large, established organizations that have a large IT or

cloud infrastructure. Entry Level Technician + Mid Level Cloud

Engineer > Senior Cloud Engineer

Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to

6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is

applicable.

Entrepreneurship: You can pursue freelancing in this

profession.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.

This list of Institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics

Statistics and Computer Science, Hyderabad, Telangana

2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivikasi, Tamil Nadu

3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi

4. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal

5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences, New Delhi

6. College of Applied Science (IHRD), Kundara Kollam, Kerala

7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan

8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited

with UGC and AICTE before applying)

1. Annai College of Arts and Science, Valathur, Tamil Nadu

2. AD Patel Institute of Technology, New Vallabh Nagar, Gujarat

3. All India Institute of Management Studies, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

4. Acropolis Institute of Management Studies and Research, Indore,

Madhya Pradesh

5. Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, Kolkata, West Bengal

6. Bangalore City College, Bangalore, Karnataka EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66

A sero Engineering College, Bapatla, Andhra Pradesh Satyavathi Divadari has spent more than two

. Bonnie Foi College, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh ; .
9. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan decades in IT and cybersecurity and cloud
gy 1 , KOJAS or: . .

10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka couujetulng n India. she 's the Head of

11. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu Enterprise Security Architecture and CyberRes

12. Thapar University, Patiala, Punjab Cloud eToeh Mice ROGTES une elie het MTech
from BITS Pilani and now lives in Bangalore.
Source: https://www.womensweb.in/2022/08/
women-trailblazers-in-the-world-of-cloud-com
puting-in-india-sept22wklsr/
“The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains

624

Computer Hardware Engineers help to accelerate new computer technology by creating
advancements in computer hardware. In order to do this, they research, design, develop, and test
computer systems and their components.
Mar EO Ss
PERSONALITY TRAITS ¥®. is Z <p SS
+ You are an analytical thinker. “ ZA + a
« You are good at tackling hardware issues. & Z “5
« You pay attention to details. >
+ You stay updated on trends with curiosity and ™~
innovation.
SCHOLARSHIPS
- Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt FEES | COURSE FEE
for engineering-specific scholarships such as ,
Indusind Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan The approx. course fee ranges Seieem
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar INR 45,000 — 10,00,000
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of ‘These figures are estimated numbers and
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on.” ROMIASTA 7 ike DS MESH TSS
« National Scholarship Portal - Please visit
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
are Central Government schemes offered by veceeeveeeeeessseeeesseteestnterenss
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
State Schemes.” Chemistry and Mathematics)
2. Complete a Bachelor’s degree
- Scholarships are also available in the Institutes (B.Tech/B.Sc,/BCA) in Computer
based on merit’ Science/Electrical or electronics engineering
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from OR
time to time) Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
Master's degree (M.Tech/M.Sc./MCA) in the same
LOANS field
OR
- VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Complete a PG Diploma in Computer Hardware
portal for students seeking education loan. This and Networking
portal has been developed under the guidance of : :
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and oe
track the education loan applications on the
website. | ) |G) EXPECTED INCOME !
« Some states have student credit cards with low ‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc. ' The approx. salary of a Computer Hardware
Engineer ranges between INR 13,100 -
+ All banks give education loans. 1,67,000* per month
Source: https;//www.payscale.com/ !
1 research/IN/Job=Hardware_Engineer/
Salary ' 625

WHERE WILL YOU WORK

Places of Work: You can work in the manufacturing EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7

sector creating electronic components and products, in

computer systems, design services, IT and web-hosting Hardware Engineer — Validation

companies and so on. Engineer > Senior Hardware Design
Engineer

Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to

6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is

applicable.

Entrepreneurship: You can pursue freelancing in this

field .

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.

This list of Institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics

Statistics and Computer Science, Hyderabad, Telangana

2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivakasi, Tamil Nadu

3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi

4. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal

5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences, New Delhi

6. College of Applied Science, Kundara Kollam, Kerala

7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan

8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited

with UGC and AICTE before applying)

1. Annai College of Arts and Science, Valathur, Tamil Nadu

2. AD Patel Institute of Technology, New Vallabh Nagar, Gujarat

3. All India Institute of Management Studies, Chennai, Tamil Nadu 66 |

4. Acropolis Institute of Management Studies and Research, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD

LiefelkpiMisTelnpellatssle 8 Meenakshi Chatterjee is a Hardware

5. Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, Kolkata, West Bengal Engineer at Apple. She is a systems

6. Bangalore City College, Bengaluru, Karnataka integrator and PCB designer. Earlier, she

7. Bapatla Engineering College, Bapatla, Andhra Pradesh seal Ra oneal Ihvitten She hale q

8. Bonnie Foi College, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh Bachelor's degree in Electrical era

9. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan Electronics and a Master's in Physics from

10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka Birla Institute Of Technology and Science

11. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu (BITS), Pilani and has finished her Masters in

Le lite el Rincusiny, Reutelte, Punjels Electrical Engineering from University of

i, California, Los Angeles (UCLA).”

Information on Institute rankings is available at -

https://www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html Source: hitps://feminisminindia.com/2017/05
/16/top-women-engineers-india/
‘The above information is for training purposes only
and will not be used for any commercial gains

626

Computer Network Architects design, build and maintain a variety of data communication networks --
from wide area network to intranet. After deployment, they also may manage the networks and
troubleshoot any issues as they rise.
Bar
PERSONALITY TRAITS w.
« You are good with computers.
+ You like to analyse problems/situations.
* You pay attention to details while working.
« You are comfortable with communicating with others.
. JS e
SCHOLARSHIPS
- Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt
for engineering-specific scholarships such as
IndusInd Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan | FEES | COURSE FEE
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar RO,
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of Y The approx. course fee range between
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on.” INR 45,400 — 10,00,000°
‘These figures are estimated numbers and
« National Scholarship Portal - Please visit will vary from Institute to Institute.
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and (=! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
State Schemes." © voce eects e sees eeeeereees
1, Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Chemistry and Mathematics)
based on merit.” 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
(B.Tech/B.Sc./BCA/B.E.) in Computer
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Science/Information System
time to time) OR
Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
LOANS Master's degree (M.Tech/M.Sc./MCA/M.E.) in the
same field
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a OR
portal for students seeking education loan. This Pursue a PG Diploma in Information System
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and UNE nn nnn NINN NNN NNN NnNNNNNDNNN NN SNNONNNNNnNNNL
track the education loan applications on the
website. | EXPECTED INCOME |
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
: Some states have student credit cards with low The approx. salary of a Computer Network
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, | Architect ranges between INR 83,334 -
Bihar, etc. 2,50,000* per month
« All banks give education loans. | Source: https;//www.payscale.com/
1 research/IN/Job=Network_Architect/
i Salary | cos
| 627

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You can work in industries such as
Finance and insurance, Educational services,
Telecommunications, Computer systems design and Junior Network Technician + Computer
related services. Network Architect — Senior Network
Architect
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is
applicable.
Entrepreneurship: You can pursue freelancing in this
profession.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics
Statistics and Computer Science, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivakasi, Tamil Nadu
3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi
4. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences, New Delhi
6. College of Applied Science, Kundara Kollam, Kerala
7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan
8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Annai College of Arts and Science, Valathur, Tamil Nadu
2. AD Patel Institute of Technology, New Vallabh Nagar, Gujarat
3. All India Institute of Management Studies, Chennai, Tamil Nadu EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 6 |
4. Acropolis Institute of Management Studies and Research, . . ;
Indore, Madhya Pradesh Jamie Smith Is the Chief Computer Analyst and
5. Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, Kolkata, West Bengal Cybersecurity Officer for RSA Security, which helps
6, Remgetore Giy Calese, Barscluny, [enmenere manage digital risk with a range of capabilities and
; ; expertise. She has earned a Bachelor of Technology
7. Bapatla Engineering College, Bapatla, Andhra Pradesh in Computer Science from New York University.
8. Bonnie Foi College, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh Smith runs all cybersecurity operations for the
9. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan company, and she is integrated with 21st-century
10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka skills such as Al intelligence, critical thinking,
11. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu emotional intelligence, communication skills, and
12. Thapar University, Patiala, Punjab extensive computer knowledge.”
Information on Institute rankings is available at - Source:htips://gurucul.com/news/the-top-25-wom
https;//wwwnirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking. htm SIESTA C DESMO AVL
‘The above information is for training purposes only and will not
be used for any commercial gains
628

A Computer Science Engineer deals with the design, implementation, and management of information systems of
both, software and hardware processes. As a computer scientist, you specialize in the theory of computation and the
design of computational systems. Computer Science engineering allies with various disciplines such as electrical and
electronics engineering, information technology, software engineering, and more.
~ a ®
Sain &
NS \ 5 . )
« Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
- Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000 =
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
scheme. Chemistry and Mathematics)
- Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The |OC Ltd offers 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Tech./B.E.)
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students in Computer Science Engineering
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The OR
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical , ,
disabilities, women and students from North East and Complete Bachelor's and then pursue Master's
JeK." degree (M.Tech/M.E.) in the same field.
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are For admissions, you must qualify entrance
Central Government schemes offered by different examination conducted at national level JEE Main,
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
_ EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.)
« Scholarships are also available in institutes based on
merit.” Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
“(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time)
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been le.
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
« Some States have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc. _
+ All banks give education loans. e
629

WHERE WILL YOU WORK

The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science

and Engineering.

This list of institutes is indicative only.

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
Maharashtra

2. COEP Technological University, Pune, Maharashtra

3. Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Vadodara,
Gujarat

4. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi

5. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

6. Delhi Technological University, New Delhi

7. LD College of Engineering, Ahmedabad, Gujarat

8. Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai,
Maharashtra

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC

and AICTE before applying )

1. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka

2. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu

3. SRM University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

4. Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering,
Bangalore, Karnataka

5. R. V. College of Engineering College, Bengaluru, Karnataka

6. PSG Tech Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka

7. Ramaiah Institute of Technology, Bengaluru, Karnataka

8. BMS College of Engineering, Bengaluru, Karnataka

630

Computer Scientists work on the theoretical side of computation, as opposed to the hardware side which
is the focus of hardware engineers. Although computer scientists can also focus their work and research
on specific areas (such as software engineering, computer graphics and so on), their foundation is the
theoretical study of computing.
* * < .
PERSONALITY TRAITS W. — t
« You demonstrate strong analytical skills. : = as
» You possess programming proficiency in Python, : = @
Java, C++, etc. iw _——
« You apply problem-solving ability effectively. F Ds
SCHOLARSHIPS
- Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt
for engineering-specific scholarships such as
Indusind Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan | FEES | COURSE FEE
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar TY
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of Y The approx. course fee ranges between
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on." INR 45,000 - 10,00,000°
“These figures are estimated numbers and
« National Scholarship Portal - Please visit will vary from Institute to Institute.
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes.” EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
based on merit.” Chemistry and Mathematics)
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
time to time) (B.Tech/B.Sc,/BCA/B.E.) in Computer
Science/Information System
LOANS OR
Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
- VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Master's degree (M.Tech/M.Sc,/MCA/M.E.) in the
portal for students seeking education loan. This same field
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and nanan
track the education loan applications on the
website. | EXPECTED INCOME !
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
« Some states have student credit cards with low | ar |
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha | The approx. salary of a Computer Scientist |
Bih A , ’ ' , | ranges between INR 35,500 - 3,34,000* per
ihar, etc.
| month.
« All banks give education loans. ! Saunece hinaay/mamopeyseaiiocen’ |
| research/IN/Job=Computer_Scientist/
| Salary | _
@ rs |

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You can work in industries such as the Health EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
Care Technology, Scientific Research Firms,
Educational institutions, Social Media Companies, Software Junior Computer Scientist > Senior
and Computer Manufacturing Companies, in Government Computer Scientist
Sectors, Financial Service Providers and so on.
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to 6 days
a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is applicable.
Entrepreneurship: You can pursue freelancing in this domain.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics,
Statistics and Computer Science, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivakasi, Tamil Nadu
3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi
4. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences, New Delhi
6. College of Applied Science, Kundara Kollam, Kerala
7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan
8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal
9. University of Delhi, New Delhi
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
]. Annai College of Arts and Science, Valathur, Tamil Nadu
2. AD Patel Institute of Technology, New Vallabh EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Nagar, Gujarat Geetha Maniunath: Ent d
3. All India Institute of Management Studies, Chennai, Sane: color tist She i the founder ond CEO of
TetalNees . NIRAMA| Health Analytix, a Bengaluru based
4. Acropolis Institute of Management Studies and Research, start-up that provides non-invasive, radiation free
welt, beclnys “erctean breast cancer screening through Al. She has a BE in
5. Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, Kolkata, West Bengal Computer Science and Engineering and a PhD in
SETS isle tel on) College, Bengaluru, Karmataka Data Mining, Semantic Web from IISc. She was
A sepa Se oe Bapaila, ere Biete=0 awarded the Computer Society of India Gold
“Bonnie Fol'-o a Opa", Sislelne Firetstes ao. Medal, TR Shamanna State Award from Karnataka
9. Birla Institute o Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan and was named as one of the top 50 NASSCOM IT
10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka innovators in DOUG ane wasalsedhewinnerekZOT1O
11. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu MIT Tech Review Grand Challenges for
cz Unc] eis lteulcle, Gall Technologists in Healthcare category.”
Information on Institute rankings is available at - a ein at
ry, 5 : S shttps; .analyticsinal ke
https://www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html * /geetha-m aa a ri yilesinalamag.com/spea
*The above information is for training purposes only and will not
be used for any commercial gains
632

A Cybersecurity Specialist is a professional responsible for protecting an organization’s computer systems, networks,
and data from cyber threats. Their primary role is to identify vulnerabilities, prevent cyberattacks, and respond to
security breaches. They implement security protocols, conduct risk assessments, and ensure compliance with
regulations to safeguard information and maintain the integrity and confidentiality of digital assets.
Bog eos ‘ V7
nl ~ ae
GX (9 —— te vey
‘ = a ;
i ae ”
+ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first A
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility 5 |
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
« Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this
scheme. *
¢ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students © wren
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The 1. Complete class 10+2 in Science stream
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical (Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics)
disabilities, women and students from North East and ,
IK? 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (BE/B.Tech./
«National Scholarship Portal - Visit B.Sc.) in Computer Science and Engineering
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are OR
central government schemes offered by different After completing a Bachelor's degree you may
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” complete a Diploma/Certification course in Cyber
Security
« Scholarships are also available in institutes based on
bie . : : ’ For admissions, you must qualify entrance
(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) examination conducted at national level (JEE Main,
JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
¢ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for EAMCET ete.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.)
students seeking education loan. This portal has been py heck the duration of th duri ;
developed under the guidance of the Department of ease check the duration of the course during enrolment
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website. eo”
« Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
+ All banks give education loans.
Se eee ee ee 5 633

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH wy”
<
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY? 2
This course is offered by the Department of Computer Science
This list of institutes Is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute Of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Indian Institute Of Technology Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
3. Indian Institute Of Technology, Guwahati, Assam
4. Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala
5. College of Engineering, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
6. Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Hyderabad, Telangana
7. Rajasthan Technical University, Kota, Rajasthan
8. Punjab Engineering College, Chandigarh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1.Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka
2. Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering, Bangalore, Karnataka
3. Kumaraguru College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
4. Dr Ambedkar Institute of Technology, Bangalore, Karnataka EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
5. Nitte Meenakshi Institute of Technology,Bangalore, Karnataka
6. Bannari Amman Institute of Technology, Erode, Tamil Nadu
7. Madras Institute of Technology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
634

Data Scientists primarily collect, analyze and interpret data to help an organisation make
decisions. They use advanced analytics techniques, such as computer programming, mathematical
modeling and so on in the process.
= e 2
PERSONALITY TRAITS Ww. > 7
»
« You are good with computers. )
+ You like working with numbers.
- You like to analyse problems/situations. (
« You are a practical person. = =)\—
aa
SCHOLARSHIPS
- Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt
for engineering-specific scholarships such as FEES | COURSE FEE
Indusind Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan RO
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar Y The approx. course fee ranges between
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of INR 45,000 — 10,00,000
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on.” “These figures are estimated numbers and
will vary from Institute to Institute.
« National Scholarship Portal - Please visit
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by EI EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and AQ oicccccccceiiceeenteeeeeeeeee reese
Suelo sieuleinles 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes 2 Complete a Bachelors Segre
SEES! Chl AMEUIh (B.Tech/B.Sc./BCA/B.E,) in Computer
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from scrence/Information System
time io tiling) Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
Master's degree (M.Tech/M.Sc./MCA/M.E.) in the
Mele same field.
. . : dyn Pr F OR
* VidyaLakshmi, www.vidy CLL ele ay be Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Sc.) in
portal for students seeking education loan. This Mathematics/Statistics followed by a Master's
portal has been developed under the guidance of degree (M.Sc) in the same field
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of g ~~ .
Finance), Ministry od Education and Indian Banks Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the PIT aaa
WISER. |G) EXPECTED INCOME |
« Some states have student credit cards with low “The figures are indicative & subject to change
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc. | The approx. salary of a Data Scientist ranges
| between INR 29,000 - 1,67,000 per month.
- All banks give education loans.
i Source: https;//www.payscale.com/ res
| _ research/IN/Job=Data_Scientist/Salary iit

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You can work in tech startups, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH Tes
Government agencies, large companies and research
institutions. Junior Data Scientist Data Scientist >
Senior Data Scientist
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is
applicable.
Entrepreneurship: You can pursue freelancing in this
domain as well as work in a startup created by you.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics
Statistics and Computer Science, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivakasi, Tamil Nadu
3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi
4. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences, New Delhi
6. College of Applied Science, Kundara Kollam, Kerala
7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan
8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Annai College of Arts and Science, Vilathur, Tamil Nadu
2. AD Patel Institute of Technology, New Vallabh Nagar,
Gujarat EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
3. All India Institute of Management Studies, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu Amarjeet Kaur is a Research Scientist with more
A. Acropolis Institute of Management Studies and than eleven years of experience. She currently
Research, Indore, Madhya Pradesh works as senior Data Science Manager at Reliance
5. Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, Kolkata, West Bengal JIO. She has a PhD in Computer Science and
6. Bangalore City College, Bengaluru, Karnataka Technology with a specialisation in Artificial
7. Bapatla Engineering College, Bapatla, Andhra Pradesh Intelligence. She wishes to push the boundaries of
8. Bonnie Foi College, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh limiting factors so that more women are motivated
9. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan he gel a PesTOas etek et SiaMie
10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka
11. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu Source:https;//indiaai.gov.iNArticle/amarjeet-
12. Thapar University, Patiala, Punjab kaur-sr-data-science-manager-reliance-jio
Information on Institute rankings ts available at - “The above information is for training purposes only and will not
https://www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking. html be used for any commercial gains
636

Database Administrators are primarily responsible for specific databases in the subsystem. While they are
not responsible for the actual content of databases, they enforce procedures for accurate, complete, and
timely update of the databases. Aa
Har rl !
PERSONALITY TRAITS ®.
« You are good with computers.
« You like to analyse problems/situations.
- You like to lead. e . t
« You are comfortable with communicating with others. > |
o °
SCHOLARSHIPS J
- Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt
for engineering-specific scholarships such as re
IndusInd Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan | —_ | COURSE FEE
Singh Scholarship Scheme, ue er soir Y The approx. course fee ranges between
Programme 2022, Central Sector NEMS Gy INR 50,000 - 10,00,000*
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on.
‘These figures are estimated numbers and
- ill from Insti Institute.
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Please visit ERE EOSIN EES
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and =
State Schemes. [=3, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
- Scholarships are also available in the Institutes 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
based on merit.” Chemistry and Mathematics)
2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from (B.Tech/B.Sc,/BCA/B.E.) in Computer
time to time) Science/Information System
OR
LOANS Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
Master's degree (M.Tech/M.Sc./MCA/M.E.) in the
g
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a same field
portal for students seeking education loan. This OR
portal has been developed under the guidance of Pursue a PG Diploma in Information System
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of ;
Finance), Ministry of Education and incian Banks Anal ll eal
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
i icati th
nang education loan applications on the Gi EXPECTED INCOME |
WEISS: “The figures are indicative & subject to change
¢ Some states have student credit cards with low The approx. salary of a Database |
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Administrator ranges between INR 20,417 -
Bihar, etc. | 84,000* per month
« All banks give education loans. Source: https://www.payscale.com/
1 research/IN/Job=Database_
1 Administrator_(DBA)/Salary oe
Q a

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You can work in MNCs, IT companies, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
Rene! Ganseiies, Imaucines, Behlang), Atense, Junior Database Administrator— Database
SUIS PEs Support Specialist Database Administrator
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to a en ne ne ae
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is Administrator > Database Architect—> Data
Clpjpilieeloes Security Specialist—Database Manager
Entrepreneurship: You can pursue freelancing in this
profession as well as in your own company.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics
Statistics and Computer Science, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivakasi, Tamil Nadu
3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi
A. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences, New Delhi
6. College of Applied Science, Kundara Kollam, Kerala
7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan
8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Annai College of Arts and Science, Vilathur, Tamil Nadu
2. AD Patel Institute of Technology, New Vallabh Nagar,
Gujarat
3. All India Institute of Management Studies, Chennai, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
Tamil Nadu
A. Acropolis Institute of Management Studies and Donna Filer holds a Bachelor's degree in
Research, Indore, Madhya Pradesh Business Administration with a concentration in
5. Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, Kolkata, West Bengal Management Information Systems. She works
6. Bangalore City College, Bengaluru, Karnataka as a Database Administrator at Gardner-
7. Bapatla Engineering College, Bapatla, Andhra Pradesh Webb. In 2019. she received the Staff
8. Bonnie Fol College, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh pb: Member Award for her dedication to customer
9. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan service
10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka ;
11. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu Source:https://digitaleommons.gardner-webb
12. Thapar University, Patiala, Punjab edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1 177&conte
Information on Institute rankings is available at - xt-gardner-webb-newscenter-archive
https///www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking. html “The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains
638

A Full Stack Developer is a person who is equipped to develop both the client and server end of a web
application. In this sense, they provide an end-to-end service, and can be involved in projects that involve
databases and building user-facing websites. . |
+ + o—_
re
Mar a r} ad
PERSONALITY TRAITS W. a |
. >»
« You are good with computers. a
« You like to analyse problems/situations. e — = +
« You like to have clear instructions to follow. q ee Gl )
« You are comfortable with communicating with others.
;
SCHOLARSHIPS
a
- Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt
for engineering-specific scholarships such as
IndusInd Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar FEES COURSE FEE
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of RC,
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on.” nee ee ne between
« National Scholarship Portal - Please visit ‘These figures are estimated numbers and
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there will vary from Institute to Institute.
are Central Government schemes offered by
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes.” —
ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
- Scholarships are also available in the Institutes rs
eee aa uneine 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream
(Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics)
"(Availability of these scholarships can vary from 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
time to time) (B.Tech/BSc./BCA/BE) in Computer
Science/Information System
OR
roa Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is Master's degree (M.Tech/MSc,/MCA/M.E,) in
portal for students seeking education loan. This the same field
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks FS
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and EXPECTED INCOME |
track the education loan applications on the “The figures are indicative & subject to change
website.
' The approx. salary of Full Stack Developer a
- Some states have student credit cards with low ranges between INR 24,000 - 1,67,000* per
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, ! month"
Bihar, etc.
| Source: https;//www.payscale.com/ !
- All banks give education loans. | research/IN/Job=Full_Stack_Software_ !
|  Engineer/Salary | _
@ ET Drees 839

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You can work in IT companies . EXPECTED GROWTH PATH Tes
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to Fresher Developer — Full Stack
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is Developer — Senior Full Stack Developer
applicable.
Entrepreneurship: You can pursue freelancing in this
profession as well as work in your own company.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics
Statistics and Computer Science, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivakasi, Tamil Nadu
3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Dehhi
4. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences, New Delhi
6. College of Applied Science, Kundara Kollam, Kerala
7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan
8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Annai College of Arts and Science, Vilathur, Tamil Nadu
2. AD Patel Institute of Technology, New Vallabh Nagar,
Gujarat
3. All India Institute of Management Studies, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu
4. Acropolis Institute of Management Studies and EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
Research, Indore, Madhya Pradesh Brandon Lyons is a Full Stack Web Developer,
5. Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, Kolkata, West Bengal with a passion on the frontend development,
6. Bangalore City College, Bengaluru, Karnataka specifically Vue.js. He graduated in computer
7. Bapatla Engineering College, Bapatla, Andhra Pradesh Science from the University of Michigan. Lyons is
8. Bonnie Foi College, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh currently working at Amazon web services
9. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan (AWS) as a full stack software engineer.”
10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka
11. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu Source: https://eynicaldeveloper.com/guests/
12. Thapar University, Patiala, Punjab ; —— .
“The above information is for training purposes only and
; will not be used for any commercial gains
Information on Institute rankings is available at -
https://www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html
640

A Game Designer and Developer is a software engineer, programmer, or scientist who designs tests, and
maintains video games. A Game Designer and Developer can work as part of a team and has the final say
in the layout of the environment present within the game. She/he is an engineer, as well as a designer at
the same time.
an =
Mar Ft “i
PERSONALITY TRAITS wx.
¢ You are good with computers. oll
¢ You like to analyse problems/situations. = nn
+ You like video games.
¢ you are comfortable with working in a team. l]
a
| = | COURSE FEE
SCHOLARSHIPS Y The approx. course fee ranges between
INR 40,000 - 19,98,000*
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit “These figures are estimated numbers and
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there will vary from Institute fo Institute.
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes* EM EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream
ae on merit . 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Des.) in Game
(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Desi d Animation foll d by Master!
ciate Ie) esign and Animation followed by Master's
degree (M.Des.) in the same discipline
LOANS OR
Complete Bachelor’s degree in Science (B.Sc.) in
¢ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Game Design and Animation/Bachelor’s degree in
portal for students seeking education loan. This Engineering (B.E.) in Information Technology,
portal has been developed under the guidance of followed by Master's degree (M.Sc./M.E.) in the
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of same discipline
Finance), Department of Higher Education (Ministry OR
of Education) and Indian Banks Association (IBA) Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Des.) in any
«Some states have student credit cards with low ascipiine followed by PG Diploma in Game
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, esigning
Bihar, etc. ;
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« All banks give education loans
ie" EXPECTED INCOME
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of a Game Designer and
Developer ranges between INR 16,667 -
1,67,000* per month.
Source: https;//www.payscale.com/re-
search/IN/Job=Video_Game_Designer/-
< Salary n°
e e e e e e e e e e ‘ 641 ,

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?

Places of Work: Game Developing Companies, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH wt

Production Houses as a VFX Artist.
Assistant/Junior Game Designer >

Entrepreneurship: You can set up your own indie Senior Game Designer — Design

game studio. Manager > Design Director

Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to

6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is

applicable.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This course is offered by the Department of Design

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Gujarat University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat

2. National Institute of Design, Bengaluru, Karnataka

3. National Institute of Design, Gandhinagar, Gujarat

4. National Institute of Design, Amaravati, Andhra Pradesh

5. National Institute of Design, Kurukshetra, Smana, Haryana

6. National Institute of Design Ahmedabad, Gujarat

7. National Institute of Design, Jorhat, Assam

8. National Institute of Design, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited with

UGC and AICTE before applying)
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD Gg

1. Artemisia College of Art and Design, Indore, . ;

Madhya Pradesh Poornima Seetharaman is one of the seminal

2. Asian Institute of Design, Bengaluru, Karnataka figures in the Indian gaming industry and has

3. Lovely Professional University, Phagwara, Punjab attracted much needed recognition towards

4. Sharda University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh women In the gaming industry. She has pursued a

5. Unitedworld Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, Gujarat BE in information technology from Pillai College

6. Whistling Woods International, Mumbai, Maharashtra of Engineering. She is the co-founder of Pinaka

7. CG Animation Academy, Pune, Maharashtra Interactive and has worked in some of the most

8. CMR University School of Science Studies, Bengaluru, notable gaming franchises in the world such as

Kannaralca Farmville and Bioshock. In 2020, she became the

first Indian game designer to achieve global

Information on the institute rankings can be found acclaim, when she was inducted into the Women

at - https;//wwwnnirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html In Genes “elle. rane,
Source: https;//www.republicworld.com/tech-
nology-news/gaming/poorni-
ma-seetharaman-indian- game-design-
er-in-global-hall-of-fame.html
*The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains

642

A Help Desk Analyst provides technical support to users by troubleshooting hardware, software, and network
issues. They log tickets, resolve problems, escalate complex issues, and ensure smooth IT operations.
r
Bar '
PERSONALITY TRAITS WW. . }
« You are customer service oriented.
« You are a clear communicator. (- ©
« You are technically proficient. OW ‘F: va
« You are a problem solver. t
« You are patient and empathetic. ;= :
?||
SCHOLARSHIPS 1 aon an OT J
- Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt FEES
for engineering-specific scholarships such as | = | COURSE FEE
IndusInd Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan Y The approx. course fee ranges between
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar INR 30,000 - 1,50,000°
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of “These figures are estimated numbers and
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on.” will vary from Institute to Institute.
« National Scholarship Portal - Please visit
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by [= EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and © vrrrrrreernentststiie
State Schemes.” 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
Chemistry and Mathematics)
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
based on merit.” (B.Tech/B.Sc./BCA) in Computer
Science/Information Technology
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from OR
time to time) Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
Master's degree (M.Tech/M.Sc./MCA) in the same
LOANS field
OR
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Complete a PG Diploma in Computer Science
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks oy
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the EXPECTED INCOME
website. Gi “The figures are indicative & subject to change
« Some states have student credit cards with low The approx. salary of a Help Desk Analyst
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, i ranges between INR 16,500 - 53,100" per
Bihar, etc. : month |
+ All banks give education loans. Source: https;//www.payscale.com/
1 research/IN/Job=Service_Desk_Analyst/
| Salary -
QV fe eed 6 643

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You can work in the IT Department of EXPECTED GROWTH PATH Tes
organisations in a wide range of industries.
Help Desk Technician > Administrator/
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to Network Administrator > Systems
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is Architect/ Design Architect
applicable.
Entrepreneurship: You can pursue freelancing in this
profession.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics
Statistics and Computer Science, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivakasi, Tamil Nadu
3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi
4. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences, New Delhi
6. College of Applied Science, Kundara Kollam, Kerala
7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan
8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal
9. National Institute of Electronics & Information Technology
(NIELIT), New Delhi
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Annai College of Arts and Science, Vilathur, Tamil Nadu
2. AD Patel Institute of Technology, New Vallabh Nagar,
Gujarat
3. All India Institute of Management Studies, Chennai, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
Tamil Nadu ; Billy Abbas is a Service Desk Analyst from
4. Acropolis Institute of Management Studies and Leeds, UK who has completed his bachelor
Research, Indore, Madhya Pradesh of science (BS) in information technology. He
5. Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, Kolkata, West Bengal .
- was also among the SDI best Service desk
6. Bapatla Engineering College, Bapatla, Andhra Pradesh analyst finalists. He is currently affiliated with
7. Bonnie Foi College, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh the Leeds Beckett University.”
8. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan Y
9. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka ; . . . 4.
10. Vellore institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu yee Apel ee
11. Thapar University, Patiala, Punjab t-of-the-year-2020-finalists/ y
Information on Institute rankings is available at - *The above information is for training purposes only
https://www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html and will not be used for any commercial gains
644

Information Technology Engineers design, install, and maintain a company’s computer systems. They are responsible
for testing, configuring, and troubleshooting hardware, software, and networking systems. They may also be
required to train staff and manage projects. g
ZE
Z |
Z, eS y
F Z
ay
y |
Z ?
- Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
- Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees © vrrrrrrerretrerretseetccescaes
of CHEMI IS is directly paid to their institutions under this 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
scheme: Chemistry and Mathematics)
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers ie | Bachelor”
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students “Somp ete acnelors degree (B.Tech/B.E./
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The B.Sc) in Information Technology/Computer
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical Science/Computer Science Engineering/Data
disabilities, women and students from North East and Science and Engineering/Electronics and
J&K. Communication Engineering
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit OR
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there are Complete Bachelor's degree followed by a
central government schemes offered by different ’ Master's degree in the same or related field
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.
¢ Scholarships are also available in institutes based on For admissions, you must quality entrance .
merit” examination conducted at national level JEE Main,
*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBIJEE, AP
EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.)
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
¢ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of Ga
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
« Some States have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar,
etc.
- All banks give education loans. a
eeeeeeeeee @ @ 645

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7"
—
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY? \
This course Is offered by the Department of Information Technology.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Delhi Technological University, New Delhi é
2. Lalbhai Dalpatbhai College of Engineering, Ahmedabad, Gujarat °
3. Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, Kolkata, West Bengal
4. Government Polytechnic, Nashik, Maharashtra
5. Government Polytechnic, Mumbai, Maharashtra
6. Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh
7. NIMS University, Jaipur, Rajasthan
8. Government Polytechnic For Girls, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka
2. PSG Collage of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
3. Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering, Bangalore, Karnataka
A, Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamilnadu
5. Birla Institute of Technology, Mesra, Jharkhand
Sh SE, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
646

IT professionals who are responsible for strategy-making and overseeing the deployment of loT (Internet
of Things) solutions across organisations are known as Internet of Things (loT) Solutions Architect. They
develop practical uses and applications of Internet of Things (loT) technology. The loT solutions architect
typically works with engineers and salespeople to facilitate process development.
Bar e
PERSONALITY TRAITS WY. -
- You are good with computers. \ A
+ You like to analyse problems/situations. |
- You pay attention to details while working.
« You are comfortable with communicating with others.
=
s
SCHOLARSHIPS
- Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt -
for engineering-specific scholarships such as | = | COURSE FEE
Indusind Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan Y The approx. course fee ranges between
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar INR 40,000 — 5,40,000°
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of ; ; ;
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on." These figures are estimated numbers and
will vary from Institute to Institute.
« National Scholarship Portal - Please visit
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by =
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
State Schemes." be ceteseeeteteetetseestesteneaeees
1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream
- Scholarships are also available in the Institutes (Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics)
based on merit.” 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
(B.Tech/B.Sc./BCA/B.E.) in Computer
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Science/Internet of Things (loT)
time to time) OR
Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
LOANS Master's degree (M.Tech/M.Sc./MCA/M.E.) in
the same field
¢ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Fe
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and EXPECTED INCOME
tra the education loan applications on the “The figures are indicative & subject to change
website.
| The approx. salary of alnternet of Things (loT)
¢ Some states have student credit cards with low Solutions Architect ranges betwen
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, INR 50,000 - 4,50,000* per month
Bihar, etc.
! Source: https;//www.payscale.com/ |
+ All banks give education loans. | research/IN/Job=Software_Archtect/
| Salary/e5a6e350/Internet-of-Things-loT ——
BQ ER

WHERE WILL YOU WORK

Places of Work: You can work in the

Telecommunication industry, in IT Services & Consulting, 2S SSF Ll ww

Industrial Machinery and also in the Electronic and Junior Internet of Things (loT) Solutions

electronic product manufacturing sector. Architect — Senior Internet of Things (loT)
Solutions Architect

Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to

6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is

applicable.

Entrepreneurship: You can pursue freelancing in this

domain.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.

This list of Institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya, Indore, Madhya Pradesh

2. Indian Institute of Technology Jodhpur, Rajasthan

3. JC Bose University of Science and Technology, Faridabad, Haryana

4. Jawaharlal Nehru Technological University, Anantpur, Andhra Pradesh

5. Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai, Maharashtra

6. Government College of Engineering, Kannur, Kerala

7. University Visvesvaraya College of Engineering, Bengaluru, Karnataka

8. Gujarat Technological University, Anmedabad, Gujarat

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited

with UGC and AICTE before applying)

1. Gulzar Group of Institutes, Ludhiana, Punjab

2. Shoolini University of Biotechnology and

Management Sciences, Bajhol, Himachal Pradesh
3. Christ University, Bengaluru, Karnataka
4. Chandigarh University, Chandigarh
5. Sharda University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh
6. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu
7. Presidency University, Bangalore, Karnataka EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
8. Sathyabama Institute of Science and Technology,

Chennai, Tamil Nadu Danilo Diaz is an Internet of Things Solutions
9. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan Architect with Microsoft. He has completed
10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka a Bachelor's in Computer Science as well as
11. Thapar University, Patiala, Punjab an MBA in Management from Arcadia

university. Diaz is focused on helping
Information on Institute rankings is available at - organizations of all sizes fully maximize the
https;//www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html potential that loT brings to their industry.”
Source: https://www.iotforall.com/webinar/
softeg-75-of-iot-projects-fail
“The above information is for training purposes only
and will not be used for any commercial gains
648

A Network Administrator deals with both the software and hardware of a computer network in a company.
He is responsible for supervising and maintaining the technological network and is the professional to go to
in case of technical or computer-based issues.
Mae — </>
PERSONALITY TRAITS WY.
« You are good with computers. SNE efit ) =
+ You like to analyse problems/situations. : css
« You pay attention to details while working. HTML
« You like to lead. ee ee —
: lace:
y, e
SCHOLARSHIPS
- Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt =
for engineering-specific scholarships such as
IndusInd Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan FEES | COURSE FEE
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar RC
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of The approx. course fee ranges between
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on.” INR 20,000 - 2,00,000
‘These figures are estimated numbers and
« National Scholarship Portal - Please visit will vary from Institute to Institute.
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes fF, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
- Scholarships are also available in the Institutes 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
based on merit.” Chemistry and Mathematics)
2. Complete a Bachelor’s degree
"(Availability of these scholarships can vary from (B.Tech/B.Sc./BCA/B.E.) in Computer
time to time) scrence/Information System
LOANS Complete a Bachelor’s degree followed by a
Master's degree (M.Tech/M.Sc./MCA/M.E.) in the
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a same field
portal for students seeking education loan. This OR ,
portal has been developed under the guidance of Complete a Bachelor's degree . ;
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of (B.Tech/B.Sc./BCA/ME.) in Network Engineering
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks followed by a Master's degree
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and (M.Tech/M.Sc,/MCA/M.E.) in the same field
track the education loan applications on the Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
website. pon none nce nn nnn nnn nnn nnn nnn enn ne nnn
« Some states have student credit cards with low Ea EXPECTED INCOME |
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, ‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
Bihar, etc.
i The approx. salary of a Network
+ All banks give education loans. : Administrator ranges between
INR 16,084 - 83,334* per month.
Source: hitps;//www.payscale.com/ | i
1 research/IN/Job=Network_Administrator je
| Salary ig

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You can work in Architectural, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH pf"
Engineering and related services, as well as in ;
Computer systems design services. Network Engineering Trainee + Network
Engineering Assistant + Network
Work Environment: The work timings are typically Administrator > Chief Network
5 to 6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift Administrator
system is applicable.
Entrepreneurship: You can pursue freelancing in
this domain.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics
Statistics and Computer Science, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivakasi, Tamil Nadu
3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi
4. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences, New Delhi
6. College of Applied Science, Kundara Kollam, Kerala
7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan
8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Annai College of Arts and Science, Vilathur, Tamil Nadu
2. AD Patel Institute of Technology, New Vallabh Nagar,
Gujarat
3. All India Institute of Management Studies, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu
4. Acropolis Institute of Management Studies and EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD (ca
Research, Indore, Madhya Pradesh Brent D. Stewart is a Network Administrator at
5, Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, Kolkata, West Bengal CommScope in North Carolina, where he focuses on
6. Bangalore City College, Bengaluru, Karnataka design and implementation of an international IP
7. Bapatla Engineering College, Bapatla, Andhra Pradesh network. Brent has worked in fiber-optic
8. Bonnie Foi College, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh manufacturing R&D, as a network consultant, and as
9. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan a certified Cisco instructor. He received a BS in
10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka physics from Lenoir-Rhyne College and is currently
11. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu finishing an MS in computer science/information
12. Thapar University, Patiala, Punjab security from James Madison University. He is
currently based in North Carolina.”
Information on Institute rankings is available at -
https;//www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html Source:http;//etutorials.org/Misc/ccnp+bsci+exam+certi
fication+guide/About+the+Author/
“The above information is for training purposes only and will not
be used for any commercial gains
650

A Computer Programmer designs, develops and tests software that meet their client's needs. They also
search for bugs in the program and try to remove those bugs to improve the overall utility of the program.
Bar S—= ef
PERSONALITY TRAITS ®. _
+ You are good with computers.
« You like to analyse problems/situations.
+ You pay attention to details while working. CSS
« You are comfortable with communicating with others.
SCHOLARSHIPS 4 om
- Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt P|
for engineering-specific scholarships such as
IndusInd Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan FEES
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar | — | COURSE FEE
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of Y The approx. course fee ranges between
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on.” INR 30.000 - 10,00,000*
« National Scholarship Portal - Please visit a are estimated memes and
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there ;
are Central Government schemes offered by
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and =
State Schemes.” ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes I. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
based on merit." Chemistry and Mathematics)
; 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from (B.Tech/B.Sc./BCA/B.E.) in Computer
: Science/Information System
time to time) OR
LOANS Complete a Bachelor’s degree followed by a
Master’s degree (M.Tech/M.Sc./MCA/M.E.) in the
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a same field
. OR
portal for students seeking education loan. This p PG Dipl in Inf tion Syst
portal has been developed under the guidance of ursue a Iproma in inrormarion System
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of ; .
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks meen On
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the EXPECTED INCOME
website. Lo ‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
+ Some states have student credit cards with low | The approx. salary of a Programmer/
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Coder/Software Engineer ranges
Bihar, etc. | between INR 20,750 - 83,334" per month |
- All banks give education loans. ' Source: https://www.payscale.com/research/IN
| /Job=Software_Engineer_%2F_Developer_%2F |
| _Programmer/Salary Lee
BQ be! 651

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You can work in IT companies. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH fi
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to Junior Developer — Software Developer —
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is Senior Developer — Lead Developer —>
applicable. Software Architect — Technical Lead —
Engineering Manager

Entrepreneurship: You can pursue freelancing in this
domain as well as start your own company.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics

Statistics and Computer Science, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivakasi, Tamil Nadu
3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi
4. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences, New Delhi
6. College of Applied Science, Kundara Kollam, Kerala
7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan
8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Annai College of Arts and Science, Vilathur, Tamil Nadu
2. AD Patel Institute of Technology, New Vallabh Nagar,

Gujarat
3. All India Institute of Management Studies, Chennai,

Tamil Nadu 66
4. Acropolis Institute of Management Studies and EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD

Research, Indore, Madhya Pradesh _. . .
5. Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, Kolkata, West Bengal Shalini Sah works as Software Engineering .
6. Bangalore City College, Bengaluru, Karnataka Manager at Meta. She has done her Blech in
7. Bapatla Engineering College, Bapatla, Andhra Pradesh Computer Science and Engineering from
8. Bonnie Foi College, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh National Institute of Technology Durgapur. ;
9. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan According fo NIT Durgapur Alumni Association,
10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka Sah IS considered the best female coder in
11. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu India, according to Hari Ram Choudhary,
12. Thapar University, Patiala, Punjab Former vice-chairman, ACM NIT Surat.
Information on Institute rankings is available at - Source: https.//www.codechef.com/users/
https://www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.htm! mischievous_me

“The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains
652

SEO (Search Engine Optimization) encompasses all activities, that help a website rank better in search
engines by leveraging the right keyword. An SEO manager is trained in providing the strategies required
to find visitors who will need a particular service and converting them to a customer. ___
——— of
Mar
PERSONALITY TRAITS WY. on
+ You are good with computers. ~~ CSS
+ You like to analyse problems/situations. = Jaw fa 0
+ You like to take on new responsibilities. ba — w
« You are comfortable with communicating with others. ' Leama @
he Yn\
+:
SCHOLARSHIPS
| FEES | COURSE FEE
- Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt RO,
for engineering-specific scholarships such as Y The approx. course fee ranges between
IndusInd Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan INR 50,000 — 2,00,000"
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar “These figures are estimated numbers and
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of will vary from Institute to Institute.
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on.”
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Please visit [= EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and Chemistry and Mathematics)
State Schemes.” 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
(B.Tech/B.Sc./BCA/B.E.) in Computer
¢ Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Science/Information System
based on merit.” OR
Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Master’s degree (MBA) in Information
time to time) System/Digital Marketing
OR
LOANS Complete a Bachelor's degree (BA) in in English/
Mass communication followed by a Master’s
e VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, isa degree (MBA) in Information System/ Digital
portal for students seeking education loan. This Marketing
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and nnn nn nnn nININ NTN NNN NNN NEUE NNN ENN
track the education loan applications on the
website. ! EXPECTED INCOME :
“The figures are indicative & subject to change
- Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha | Mite e)p/eitexe cellelny er @ SEO Mlemtelerer Kenighess
’ ’ ’ ’ | between INR 19,500 — 84,000* per month.
Bihar, etc.
. . Source: https;//www.payscale.com
« All banks give education loans. | research/IN/Job-Search. Engine. v’
| Optimization_(SEO)_Manager/Salary
BQ cee ee ee ew ee 653

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You can work in any company or EXPECTED GROWTH PATH Ts
business with an online presence who wishes to reach
more people, such as startups, educational institutions SEO Analyst > SEO Strategist + SEO
and so on. Manager ~ Head of SEO = Director of
SEO
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is
applicable.
Entrepreneurship: You can work in your own company
as well as pursue freelancing in this profession.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics
Statistics and Computer Science, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivakasi, Tamil Nadu
3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi
4. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences, New Delhi
6. College of Applied Science, Kundara Kollam, Kerala
7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan
8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Annai College of Arts and Science, Vilathur, Tamil Nadu
2. AD Patel Institute of Technology, New Vallabh Nagar,
Gujarat
3. All India Institute of Management Studies, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
4.A lis Institute of M t Studi .
Research Indore, Madhya Pradesh veles ene Stephanie Castillo is Associate SEO manager for
: i u The New York Times. Previously she has worked with
5. Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, Kolkata, West Bengal . . . . ;
6, Bangalore City College, Bengaluru, Karnataka media houses like Hearst Magazines and Time Inc’s
7. Bapatla Engineering College, Bapatla, Andhra Pradesh Com Seine ngs ars one Mises
8. Bonnie Foi College, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh OMMUNICATION TOM ME Kings LOUege.
9. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan Saunas avehisleliieoray/au ep 202
10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka 7/stephani fil
11. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu Bef EEC
12. Thapar University, Patiala, Punjab *The above information is for training purposes only and will not
be used for any commercial gains
Information on Institute rankings is available at -
https://www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html
654

A Software Application Packager creates, configures, and customizes software installations for deployment across
systems, ensuring compatibility and efficiency. A Software Application Packager analyses organisations' needs and
existing processes, assesses necessary changes and writes custom software.
te -@
PERSONALITY TRAITS ®. , .
« You are good with computers. ‘
+ You like to analyse problems/situations. ~~...
« You like to have clear instructions to follow. _ , ————
« You are comfortable with communicating with others. —> _ =
¢ ~
SCHOLARSHIPS V)
- Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt a
for engineering-specific scholarships such as - a
IndusInd Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on.” COURSE FEE
FEES | |he approx. course fee ranges between
- National Scholarship Portal - Please visit —O INR 10,000 - 5,00,000*
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there PY these figures are estimated numbers and
are Central Government schemes offered by will vary from Institute to Institute.
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes.”
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
based on merit’ ; ; ;
"(Availability of these scholarships can vary from 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
time to time) Chemistry and Mathematics)
2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
LOANS (B.Tech/B.Sc./BCA/B.E.) in Computer
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Science/Information System
portal for students seeking education loan. This OR ,
portal has been developed under the guidance of Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Master's degree (M.Tech/M.Sc,/MCA/M.E.) in the
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks same field
Association (IBA). Student i ly and
Poona a loon applications on the. Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
website. i
+ Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Ga EXPECTED INCOME
Bihar, etc. | ‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
+ All banks give education loans. The OPPlox. salary of a Software
' Application Packager ranges between
' INR 23,000 - 1,00,000* per month*
' Source: https://in.talent.com/salary?- oe
job=applicationtpackaging ict
© Dee eee ee ee 655

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You can work in IT companies and EXPECTED GROWTH PATH f?
Multinational companies.
Trainee Software Packager — Software

Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to Packager > Senior Software Packager >
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is Packaging Head
applicable.
Entrepreneurship: You can pursue freelancing in this
profession.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics

Statistics and Computer Science, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivakasi, Tamil Nadu
3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi
4. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences, New Delhi
6. College of Applied Science, Kundara Kollam, Kerala
7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan
8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Annai College of Arts and Science, Vilathur, Tamil Nadu
2. AD Patel Institute of Technology, New Vallabh Nagar,

Gujarat
3. All India Institute of Management Studies, Chennai,

Tamil Nadu
4. Acropolis Institute of Management Studies and EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD Gg

Xeseciea, ‘ndlore, Metela/e) *eekest Kiran Mantagi is the Technical Product
5. Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, Kolkata, West Bengal Manager for Flexera Application Readiness
6. Bangalore City College, Bengaluru, Karnataka product line - AdminStudio and Workflow
7. Bapatla Engineering College, Bapatla, Andhra Pradesh Manager. He has received his bachelor’s
ebleseaull Aces Gellh of Eutelesel Ihlelel i elleiteTeL San degree in Electronics and communication
9. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan enaineerina followed by a Master's in
10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka Con uter Chience from Mani al Institute of
11. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu Technology Kiran has over eight years of
12. Thapar University, Patiala, Punjab experience in application packaging.”
Information on Institute rankings is available at - Source: https://appmanagevent.com/index.php
https://www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html /speakers/519-kiran-mantagi-flexera

“The above information is for training purposes only and
As will not be used for any commercial gains

Systems Analysts are IT professionals whose primarily work is to ensure that systems, infrastructures and
computer systems are functioning effectively and efficiently.
Es ll aati
Bar = —=
PERSONALITY TRAITS ¥. l l I I
« You are good with computers. | (
« You like to analyse problems/situations. i OO) | ae
¢ You pay attention to details while working. ——
« You are comfortable with communicating with others. | |
oer Wy
Tocoe
im -
SCHOLARSHIPS p00 | 2383
rt |---|
- Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt 2000 |! —
for engineering-specific scholarships such as
IndusInd Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan FEES
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar | — | COURSE FEE
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of Y The a A b
. . pprox. course fee ranges between
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on. INR 45,000 — 10,00,000*
- National Scholarship Portal - Please visit TOSS iigRIicS Cie Shier) MTS EMME)
: . . will vary from Institute to Institute.
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes." ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
+ Scholarships are also available in the Institutes 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
based on merit.” Chemistry and Mathematics)
2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from (B.Tech/B.Sc./BCA/B.E.) in Computer
time to time) Science/Information System
OR
LOANS Complete a Bachelor’s degree followed by a
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Master's degree (M.Tech/M.Sc./MCA/M.E.) in the
portal for students seeking education loan. This same field
portal has been developed under the guidance of OR
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Pursue a PG Diploma in Information System
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
track the education loan applications on the
website. Os
- Some states have student credit cards with low EXPECTED INCOME |
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, “The figures are indicative & subject to change
Bihar, etc.
: The approx. salary of a Systems Analyst ranges |
» All banks give education loans. between INR 20,667 - 83,334* per month. |
Source: https;//www.payscale.com/
1 research/IN/Job=Systems_Analyst/Salary
@ ererenararares ©

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You may work directly for an EXPECTED GROWTH PATH f
organization or as contractors, often for an . .
information technology firm. Junior Systems Analyst ~ Senior Systems
Analyst
Work Environment: The work timings are typically
5 to 6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift
system is applicable.
Entrepreneurship: You can find freelancing in this
profession
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics
Statistics and Computer Science, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivakasi, Tamil Nadu
3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi
4. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences, New Delhi
6. College of Applied Science, Kundara Kollam, Kerala
7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan
8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal
9. University of Delhi (DU), New Delhi
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Annai College of Arts and Science, Valathur, Tamil Nadu
2. AD Patel Institute of Technology, New Vallabh
Nagar, Gujarat
3. All India Institute of Management Studies, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu EXAMPLE FROMTHE FIELD [J
4. Acropolis Institute of Management Studies and Manjula Ganta is the director of Application
Research, Indore, Madhya Pradesh Deval Pecealbrecverecennel + ADP
evelopment, Global Product & Technology a ;
5. Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, Kolkata, West Bengal ine, She pursced a Bache lena in Maikenanhics and
6. Bangalore City College, Bangalore, Karnataka ne. it P | lled into a Diol
7. Bapatla Engineering College, Andhra Pradesh Ld me Mex y enroliee ino ap “ns she. m
8. Bonnie Foi College, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh een anagement i lain cal me
; ; yo ational Institute of Information Technology (NIIT).
9. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan She later earned her MBA with a major in finance.”
10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka ;
11.Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu Source:https;//www.adp.com/spark/articles/2020/05/
12. Thapar University, Patiala, Punjab adp-women-in-stem-manjula-ganta.aspx
Information on Institute rankings is available at - “The above information is for training purposes only and will not
https;//www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.htm! be used for any commercial gains
658

In the digital world, UX refers to everything that affects a user's interaction with a digital product. Hence,
as a UX Designer you will ensure that the 'user experience’ for individuals using a website or an
application or a digital service is as easy as possible. &
Har | SS Q
PERSONALITY TRAITS wy. rp) 3 ques
« You have a creative bent of mind. ? es f )
* You are comfortable communicating with " | »~ >
others. Tr ®
« You like to do experiments. “Zz > y . > §
OS Py
& e T
SCHOLARSHIPS p
- Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt < Qf
for engineering-specific scholarships such as
IndusInd Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan FrES
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar | — | COURSE FEE
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of Y The approx. course fee ranges between
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on. INR 6,630 - 5,28,000°
- National Scholarship Portal - Please visit ‘These figures are estimated numbers and
: . . will vary from Institute to Institute.
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes.” ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
- Scholarships are also available in the Institutes 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream
based on merit.” (Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics)
2. Complete a Bachelor's degree in User
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Experience Design/Computer Science or
time to time) Engineering
OR
LOANS Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
- VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Master's degree in the same field
portal for students seeking education loan. This OR
portal has been developed under the guidance of Pursue a certificate/diploma course in UX
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Design
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
track the education loan applications on the pao non nnn nnn nnn nnn nnn nnn nn 8 85
website.
| EXPECTED INCOME |
« Some states have student credit cards with low “The figures are indicative & subject to change
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc. 1 The approx. salary of a UX Designer ranges
| between INR 21,000 - 1,50,000* per month.
+ All banks give education loans.
| Source: https://www.glassdoor.co.in/Commu- |
| nity/index.htm
QZ eo ee © © © © © ee & 659

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of work: Any company, which offers an application, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH f/
software, or a digital product is in need of a UX designer. For
example multinational corporation, digital communications UX Designer > Senior UX Designer >
technology companies, software companies and so on. Head UX Designer or Principal UX
Designer
Work Environment: You have to work in offices or studios and
meet strict deadlines. You may be needed to interact with
multiple people and juggle multiple projects simultaneously.
It entails unconventional working hours.
Entrepreneurship: You can choose to be a freelance UX Designer.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. IDC School of Design, IIT Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra
2. Department of Design, IIT Guwahati, Guwahati, Assam
3. National Institute of Design, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
4. National Institute of Design, Gandhinagar, Gujarat
5. National Institute of Design, Bengaluru, Karnataka
6. National Institute of Design, Kurukshetra, Haryana
7. National Institute of Design, Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh
8. National Institute of Design, Jorhat, Assam
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(To be checked with UGC and AICTE for its
affiliation and accreditation)
1. Srishti School of Art and Design, Bangalore, Karnataa
2. UID, Karnavati University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat
3. Chitkara School of Art & Design, Chitkara University,
Patiala, Punjab
4. Symbiosis Institute of Design, Pune, Maharashtra
5. Maharashtra Institute of Design, Pune, Maharashtra
6. Apeejay Institute of Design, New Delhi
7. Sushant School of Design, Ansal University, Haryana
8. UPES School of Design, Dehradun, Uttarakhand
9. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan
10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka A
11. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu y N
12. Thapar University, Patiala, Punjab Py y »
Information on Institute rankings is available at - : .
https://www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html . :
- ,

Virtual Reality (VR) is a computer-technology-driven atmosphere with realistic-looking objects and images
that offer users the feeling of being completely engrossed in their environment. A Virtual Reality Engineer is
therefore a person who uses technology to create a virtual reality environment which can be experienced
in an electronic device (such as VR headsets).
te |
ie ha .
| ee
) Re oa
Nae, = " —
¢ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship - =
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.
« Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About
20,000 such engineering scholarships are awarded by
the Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course
fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions
uncer this scheme." [=], EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The |OC Ltd AQ] vrevcceertecceeeettenneeenteness
offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible students. . . :
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate 1. Complete 10 + 2 in the Science stream (Physics,
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students Chemistry and Maths)
with physical disabilities, women and students from North 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Sc./B.E./B.Tech)
East and J&K." in Artificial Engineering and Virtual Reality
+ National Scholarship Portal - Visit OR
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there are Complete Bachelor's degree followed by a
Central government schemes offered by different Master's dearee in the same or related field
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” g © oF related Ne
+ Scholarships are also available in the institutes based For admissions, you must qualify entrance
on merit.” examination conducted at national level EE Main,
*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.)
: : Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education(Ministry of Education) and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and track the
education loan applications on the website. Ga
« Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
+ All banks give education loans.
-° 661

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH sy”
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES es
1. Indian Institutes of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu (J >
2. Indian Institutes of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh =
3. Indian Institutes of Technology, Guwahati, Assam __ R
A. Periyar University, Salam, Tamil Nadu = N
5. Indian Institutes of Technology, Jodhpur, Rajashthan
6. Indian Institutes of Information Technology Bhubaneswar, Odisha
7. Indian Institutes of Technology, Roorkee, Uttrakhand
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying) ¢
ys
1. NorthCap University, Gurgaon, Haryana 4
2. Chandigarh University, Chandigarh EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
3. Presidency University, Bangaluru, Karnataka
4. Chitkara University, Baddi, Himachal Pradesh
5. Lingaya's Vidyyapeeth, Faridabad, Haryana
6. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https://www. nirtindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
662

A Web Analyst determines how much traffic a website receives by tracking and analysing user activities
on the website. They collect information about the number of visitors to a website and the number of page
views.
Bar
PERSONALITY TRAITS wv.
« You are good with computers.
+ You are good with numbers. 1 \ .)
You like to analyse problems/situations. ‘wh
+ You pay attention to details while working. |
y
( oc
SCHOLARSHIPS AY - 1A
« Engineering specific scholarships - You can opt
for engineering-specific scholarships such as
IndusInd Foundation Scholarship, Baba Gurbachan FEES | COURSE FEE
Singh Scholarship Scheme, Samsung Star Scholar —O
Programme 2022, Central Sector Scheme of YF The approx. course fee ranges between
i) g
Scholarships, JSPN Scholarship 2022 and so on.” INR 45,000 - 10,00,000*
“These figures are estimated numbers and
« National Scholarship Portal - Please visit will vary from Institute to Institute.
www-.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different Departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and =] EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
State Schemes.” ES Lecceeaeeeceeeneeeeaeueeeeenaeeeoaes
¢ Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Chemistry ond Mathematics) stream (Physics,
eke en merit. . 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
(Availability of these scholarships can vary from (B.Tech/B.Sc./BCA/B.E.) in Computer
Hine HO mS) Science/Information System
LOANS OR
Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is 0 Master seesree (M.Tech/M.Sc./MCA/ME.) in the
portal for students seeking education loan. This OR
portal has been developed under the guidance of Pursue a PG Diploma in Information System
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the EET
website.
! EXPECTED INCOME |
« Some states have student credit cards with low The figures are indicative & subject to change
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Tiecaare: sclem aia Web Anle renees
Bihar, etc. | between INR 16,500 - 75,000* per month.
+ All banks give education loans. | Sougaee Hise mmnmapneala can :
| research/IN/Job=Web_Analyst/Salary
eee eee pgs ae cece | eo.
@ PEDIDIDD ID os

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You can work in any company or EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ”
business with an online presence who wishes to
reach more people, such as startups, educational Junior Web Analyst > Senior Web analyst
institutions and so on.
Work Environment: The work timings are typically
5 to 6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift
system is applicable.
Entrepreneurship: You can work in your own
company as well as pursue freelancing in this
profession.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Computer Science.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. CR Rao Advanced Institute of Mathematics,

Statistics and Computer Science, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Ayya Nadar Janaki Ammal College, Sivakasi, Tamil Nadu
3. Atma Ram Sanatan Dharma College, New Delhi
4. Asutosh College, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Bhaskaracharya College of Applied Sciences,

New Delhi
6. College of Applied Science, Kundara Kollam, Kerala
7. Government Engineering College, Bikaner, Rajasthan
8. East Calcutta Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Annai College of Arts and Science, Vilathur, Tamil Nadu
2. AD Patel Institute of Technology, New Vallabh Nagar, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66

Gujarat
3. All India Institute of Management Studies, Chennai, Nikhalesh Patel is the Senior Web Analyst at

Tamil Nadu iMedia Designs. He has completed his B.Tech in
4. Acropolis Institute of Management Studies and computer science from BMS Institute of Technology

Research, Indore, Madhya Pradesh and Management, after which he pursued a Masters
5. Acharya Prafulla Chandra College, Kolkata, West Bengal infetpplied SBMS (ese) in Seuitelre Sree eting
6. Bangalore City College, Bengaluru, Karnataka ic eoncarels Pea ai 6 Kop oereo Vel

; ; developing custom web application on
7. Bapatla Engineering College, Bapatla, Andhra Pradesh LAMP/WAMP environment and designing APIs for
8. Bonnie Foi College, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh mabile wale services"
9. Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, Rajasthan
10. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka Source:https;//userpeek.com/blog/web-analysts-y
11. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu ou-should-follow/
12. Thapar University, Patiala, Punjab
*The above information is for training purposes only and will not
Information on Institute rankings is available at - be usho tor any commercial gains
https;//www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html
664

A Web Designer is responsible for making websites interactive, dynamic, attractive while providing access to the
customers to their desired information. A Web Designer is responsible for creating the design and layout of a website
or web pages. Web Designers can work on a brand new website or update an already existing site.
a ° 3
PERSONALITY TRAITS ®. ”
+ You are good with computers. pi \
« You pay attention to details while working. eres r .
+ You like to have clear instructions to follow.
+ You like to work in a team. _!
SCHOLARSHIPS ay
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit = JY» _—
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by FEES
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and | —O COURSE FEE
State Schemes.” Y The approx. course fee ranges between
; INR 19,000 - 2,50,000°
PM Scholarship Scheme (PMSS) - This scheme . ; ;
supports students from economically weaker These figures are estimated numbers and
. : : . will vary from Institute to Institute.
sections of society to pursue higher education in
various technical and non-technical fields, including
web design and graphic design. EB EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
Central Sector Scheme of Scholarships for re ;
College and University Students - The Ministry of 1. Complete 10 + 2 in Science stream (Physics,
Education offers scholarships for students pursuing Chemistry and Mathematics)
higher education, including programs related to 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Arts
web design. (B.A.)/Science (B.Sc.) in Multimedia and Web
; ; |. Design followed by Master's degree in Arts
¢ Scholarships are also available in the institutes (M.A.)/Science (M.Sc.) in E-commerce and Web
based on merit.” Desi
gn
ye . OR
. f
ine tonne of these scholarships can vary from Complete Bachelor’s degree in any subject of
your choice and then complete PG Diploma in
LOANS Web Design
- VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of EXPECTED INCOME
Finance), Department of Higher Education (Ministry ‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
of Education) and Indian Banks Association (IBA)
The approx. salary of a Web Designer
eSome states have student credit cards with low ranges between INR 10,000 - 62,416*
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, per month.
Bihar, etc.
. . Source: https://www.payscale.com/re-
olsen gine Gelbaertem [eters search/IN/Job=Web_Designer/Salary
QD eee ee ee © ee © 665

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Software Companies, IT
Consultancies, Specialist Web Design Companies, WT
Large Corporate Organisations, and in any EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
organisation that uses Computer Systems. Trainee + Web Designer > Senior Web
Designer

Entrepreneurship: You can also start your own web
designing company offering your services to clients.
Work Environment: You will typically work 5 to 6 days
a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is
applicable.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Science/Multimedia Design
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Government College, Rajahmundry, Andhra Pradesh
2. Amardeep Singh Shergill Memorial College,

Mukandpur, Punjab
3. Government Polytechnic, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh
4. Government Polytechnic, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
5. Institute of Computer Science, Ujjain, Madhya Pradesh
6. National Institute of Technical Teachers Training

and Research, Kolkata, West Bengal
7. National Institute of Electronics & Information

Technology, Kolkata, West Bengal
8. National Institute of Design, Mumbai, Maharashtra
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. De Paul Institute of Science and Technology, Kochi, Kerala EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
2. hteeae Textile and Engineering Institute, Ichalkaranji Chris Coyier a front end web developer and web
3. Hans Raj Mahila Maha Vidyalaya, Jalandhar, Punjab designer as wel ie SonictMnIcn eneeleron

; which is an online community for

4, International Academy of Computer Graphics, ; .

“ydlenebose), Telengens testing and showcasing user-created HTML, CSS
5. ICAT Design and Media College, Hyderabad, Telangana and JavaScript code snippets. volilad ;
6. Lyallpur Khalsa College, Jalandhar, Punjab graduated from the University of Wisconsin, gradu-

; ! ’ ating in Graphic Design. He now
7.7 Star Academy, Kolkata, West Bengal
. ; . . . co-hosts a web development podcast known
8. Asian Educational Institute, Patiala, Punjab 5
as ShopTalk.
Information on the institute rankings can be found at .
} pe . Source: https;//www.creativeblo-
- https//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking. htm! g.com/web-design/names-every-design-
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE er-shouloknow-11139423
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) ‘The above information is for training purposes only and will not
be used for any commercial gains
666

Management ()

vill wee *B»
a x3 an
eB», ve
Cin
a? oR
a=

w mS
Sa &
.@ we
o@ gy.
Rab we
(ww)

Bachelor's Degree (3-4 years) INR
¢ You are good in communication. 20,000 - 1,50,000*
« You are comfortable working in a team. Postgraduate Courses (2 years) INR
¢ You are organized in your work. 30,000 - 2,00,000*
“These figures are estimated numbers and
will vary from Institute to Institute.
EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
Certificate
Complete Class 10 or 12 in any stream
(preferably with Home Science or related
subjects). Pursue short-term certificate courses in
catering, food safety, beverage service, or
hospitality management offered by vocational
training centers, private institutes, or
government-run skill development programs.
Diploma
Diploma in Hotel Management, Diploma in
Catering Management, offered by vocational
institutes and polytechnics.
Undergraduate
Class 12 pass (preferably with Home Science or
related stream). Bachelor of Hotel Management
(BHM), B.Sc. in Hotel and Catering Management.
Postgraduate
A postgraduate degree provides advanced
knowledge in managing large catering
operations, event planning, and hotel
management.
Please check the duration of ihe course uring enrolment
e
: — |) eee) ‘These figures are taken from NCS and are indicative
"las 4 and subject to change
ye The approx. salary of an assistant Catering
eh | J Manager ranges between INR 10,000 -
~ 12,000* per month
| Source - https://bit.ly/3 YOPSLG
669

Assistant ~ Floor Manager = Assistant
Catering Manager > Catering Manager
/\n-Charge
This course is offered by the Hotel Management
Institutes.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
? t-
1. Institute of Hotel Management, Goa . we
2. Institute of Hotel Management, New Delhi ++-@O, , wa
3. Institute of Hotel Management, Mumbai, Maharashtra < 7
A. Institute of Hotel Management, Kolkata, West Bengal : |
5. Institute of Hotel Management, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
6. Institute of Hotel Management, Thiruvananthapuram, i
Tamil Nadu J SPEDE PPPEED Bi
7. Institute of Hotel Management, Hyderabad, Telangana
8. Institute of Hotel Management, Bangalore, Karnataka
9. Institute of Hotel Management, Aurangabad, Maharashtra
PRIVATE INSTITUTES =_ zz
(Please check if the Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying)
]. Welcome Graduate School of Hotel Administration,
Karnataka K.M.Pillai was only 25 when a strike crippled
2. Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, the catering services of the factory near
Karnataka Vadodara where he worked. Pillai stepped in
3. Guru Nanak Institute of Hotel Management, to take over the catering to supply to a 2,800
Kolkata, West Bengal workforce. Today he heads his own catering
4. Bharati Vidyapeeth Deemed University, Pune, company, Noida based PYX Industrial
Maharashtra Caterers, which provides meals to more than
5. Oberoi Center of Learning and Devlopment, New Delhi 8,000 employees of corporates such as Airtel,
Birla soft, GlobalLogic and Tech Mahindra.
Information on the institute rankings can be Pillai aims to cater to 11,000 meals per day
found at - https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html and is moving his company towards that.
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE Source - https://www.businesstoday.in/
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) magazine/new-business/story/catering-to-
success-12479-2007-04-05
“The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains
670

A BPO Executive (Business Process Outsourcing Executive) is a professional responsible for handling various tasks
related to the outsourcing of business processes. These tasks can include customer support, technical support,
data entry, back-office operations, and more, depending on the organization's needs.
( =
S\/ ’
. mi
Y L x |

« National Scholarship Portal - Visit

www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there

are Central Government schemes offered by

different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and

State Schemes’.

« Scholarships are also available in the institutes

based on merit’.

‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from

time to time)

ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a oe
1. Complete 10+2 in any stream (for non-
portal for students seeking education loan. This . . .
; technical voice based BPO category job)

portal has been developed under the guidance of OR

the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Complete a Bachelor's in Marketing,

Finance), Department of Higher Education (Ministry Commerce, Banking, or Business

of Education) and Indian Banks Association (IBA) poministration (for technical non-voice based

«Some states have student credit cards with low job)

interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Please check the duration of the course during enrolment

Bihar, etc.

—_

toe eee ee OY

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: IT, Customer Support, Human Resources,
Training and Logistics departments of MNCs.
Work Environment: It is a desk job. At the entry level you
will not handle any team. Local travel is not a part of job EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
profile. You will be working in shifts. You are likely to work Associate + Specialist + Team Lead +
6 days a week 9 to 10 hours every day. M
anager
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of
Management or Commerce.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. National Institute of Electronics and Information
Technology, Various Cities in India ‘ € 9
2. Institute of Human Resources Development,
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala
3. Skill Development and Entrepreneurship Ministry, \
Various Cities in India
4. Indira Gandhi National Open University, New
Delhi
5. State Skill Development Centres, Various States
Punjab, Maharashtra
| EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD J
Hue Ie UES oo ; Virendra Kaith is one of the most well-known drum-
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited mers in India. He has been freelancing since 2012.
with UGC before applying) Currently, he is associated with
1. National Institute of Information Technology, Demonic Resurrection and Scribe, which are metal
Various Cities in India bands. He has a Hindi rock band called Sparsh.
2. Aptech, Various Cities in India Kaith has a B.Com degree from Siddharth College of
3. Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai, Commerce & Economics, Mumbai. He started his
Maharashtra career as a BPO executive but eventually found his
4. Xavier Institute of Management, Bhubaneswar, calling in music.”
Odisha : ;
5. Manipal Global Education Services, Various Cities Source: https///www.therocktologist.com/inter-
Tele view-with-virendra-kaith.html
*The above information is for training purposes only and will not
be used for any commercial gains
672

An Event Manager is a person who is responsible for organising small-to large-scale programs such as
weddings, business meets, conferences, parties and so on. They make sure that the events run smoothly
and resolve issues if they arise.
Ve
e
e R
@ >
‘N
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’.
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes
based on merit”.
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from
time to time) EB EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
1. Complete 10+2 in any stream
¢ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a 2. Complete Bachelor's in Business
portal for students seeking education loan. This Administration(BBA)/Hotel
portal has been developed under the guidance of Po .
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Moraes Hospitality Management/Business
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks OR g
Association (IBA). . .
Complete a Diploma in Event Management/
«Some states have student credit cards with low Hotel/ Hospitality Management etc.
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, OR
Bihar, etc. Complete Bachelor's and follow it up with a
Master's in the same or allied field
- All banks give education loans.
== :

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work
You are likely to work for Event Management EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ~7
organizations, Hotels and Banquets halls among others. FE enit@oordinaion ies: itanieeqthiane
Work Environment .
You are likely to handle a team. Your job entails iager-> Event: Manager, / senter Even!
y | : :
; ; Coordinator—> Senior Event Manager /
travelling. You are likely to work 5 to 6 days a week and Event Director
8 to 9 hours every day. This may vary from organization
to organization. You might have to put in more hours as
and when the necessity arises.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The subjects are offered by the School or Department
of Management
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad,
Gujarat
2. Indian Institute of Management Calcutta, Kolkata,
West Bengal
3. Indian Institute of Management, Bangalore,
Karnataka
4. Indian Institute of Management Indore,
Madhya Pradesh
5. Indian Institute of Social Welfare and Business
Management, Kolkata, West Bengal
6. Tamil Nadu Open University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
7. Shaheed Sukhdev College of Business Studies,
New Delhi
8. State Institute of Hotel Management, Rohtak,
Haryana
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC before
applying)
1. Tritya Institute of Event Management, New Delhi
2. National Academy of Event Management and
Development, Mumbai, Maharashtra EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66 |
3. National Institute of Event Management, New Delhi Vandana Mohan is the first woman event manager in
4. Impact Institute of Event Management, New Delhi the country. Her company Backstage Productions (now
5. Amity School of Communication, Noida, The Wedding Design Company) is also the first all-fe-
Uttar Pradesh male event-management company. She did her Bache-
6. School of Business, University of Petroleum and lor’s in Political Science. Mohan has done over 500 wed-
Energy Studies, Dehradun, Uttrakhand dings till date.”
7. Ajeenkya DY Patil University, Pune, Maharashtra
8. Jain University, Bangaluru, Karnataka Source: https;//wow.outlookbusiness.com/vandana-mo-
han/
Information on institute ranking is available at -
https///www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.htm! *The above information is for training purposes only and will not be
used for any commercial gains
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
674

A Human Resource Manager is responsible for recruiting suitable employees for the organization. Those who work
in HR match candidates with specific roles in organizations, arrange interviews, coordinate and facilitate
onboarding new employees. They also handle compensation, benefits and terminations. The HR department in any
organization is responsible for building a safe, healthy, stress-free working environment and drawing documents on
internal policies.
*% *
PERSONALITY TRAITS WW. r
« You have exceptional interpersonal and communication skills.
e You are good at negotiating with others.
« You love to be around people.
« You have a desire for others to be seen and heard.
SCHOLARSHIPS
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there FEES | COURSE FEE
are Central Government schemes offered by —Y
different departments, UGC/AICTE schemes and Y The approx. course fee ranges between
state schemes’. INR 12,000 - 1,50,000*
“These figures are estimated numbers and
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from will vary from Institute to Institute.
time to time)
LOANS =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, Is a ES
portal for students seeking education loan. This 1. Complete 1042 in any stream
portal has been developed under the guidance of 2. Complete Bachelors’ degree (B.B.A.) in Human
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Resources
Finance), Department of Higher Education (Ministry OR
of Education) and Indian Banks Association (IBA). Complete Bachelor's degree and then pursue
Students can view, apply and track the education Master's in Human Resource Management
loan applications on the website. OR
Complete Bachelor's degree (B.A./B.Sc./B.B.A.),
« Some states have student credit cards with low followed by a Post-Graduate Diploma in Human
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Resources
Bihar, etc.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
+ All banks give education loans. rong nnn nnn nanan nnn nnn nanan ana na manana nasa sa ssa saan
|G) EXPECTED INCOME |
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change |
‘The approx. salary of an HR manager with
' experience ranges between INR 50,000 -
‘  2,00,000* per month.
'  Source:https://www.payscale.com/research/]_ |
| N/Job=Human_Resources_(HR)_Manager/Sal
i ary Pot

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of work: All organizations will require more
human resource professionals for the smooth EXPECTED GROWTH PATH i
functioning of the organization. You can work both
for government and private institutions. HR Intern — HR Executive > Assistant
Manager ~Manager
Entrepreneurship: After gaining some experience,
HR professionals may start their own agencies or
work independently
Work Environment: You are expected to work in an
office setup, collaborate with all other teams and
interact with people daily. You are also expected to
understand event management as well as facilitate
celebrations within the organization. Both full-time
and part-time work opportunities are available in
this role.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Business Administration.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
1. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
2. Lala Lajpat Rai College of Commerce
and Economics, New Delhi
3. Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh
4. University of Delhi, New Delhi
5. Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh
6. Visva Bharati University, Shantiniketan, West Bengal
7. University of Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
8. Utkal University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited
With UGC before opplying) EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD (J
1. Amity International Business School, Noida, Uttar Pradesh Hema Ravichandar is a thought leader in the
2. Christ University, Bengaluru, Karnataka field of HR. After completing her management
3. Narsee Monjee Institute of Management Studies, degree from the Indian Institute of Management,
Mumbai, Maharashtra Ahmedabad, she started her career with Motor
4. CMR University, Bengaluru, Karnataka Industries Company Limited (MICO), in 1983.
5. Lovely Professional University, Jalandhar, Punjab Later in 1992, she joined Infosys as the Head of
6. Kalinga University, Raipur, Chhattisgarh HR. Hema has been conferred with several
7. St. Xaviers College, Kolkata, West Bengal awards including three HR Professional of the
Year Awards and a listing amongst the ‘25 Most
Information on the institute rankings Powerful Women in India’. Ms. Ravichandar also
can be found at - writes columns in leading newspapers on her
https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html area of expe rtise.*
Source: https://hi.londonspeakerbureau.com/spe
aker-profile/hema-ravichandar/
676 “The above information is for training purposes only
and will not be used for any commercial gains

An Inventory Manager is responsible for directing and managing the tasks related to inventor
y g p g ells y
management. They coordinate and plan the production plan, manage inventory, and schedule and plan
g y p p p g y. p
the final product.
Bar ~
PERSONALITY TRAITS WY.
Ss
“es
+ You like to keep your things organised. | S*
« You pay attention to details while working. Sy
« You are comfortable communicating with others. > ~
- You like to lead. - > Wes
~ x
Ss. &
S .
Soe
eoeNQ
SCHOLARSHIPS PSK
1% Sag
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’.
| => | COURSE FEE
- Scholarships are also available in the institutes Ue
themselves based on merit. ¥ aes aan ranges between
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from “These figures are estimated numbers and
time to time) will vary from Institute to Institute.
LOANS
. oe [= EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a QD veceeeeccssteccceeeeseeeeeeetettsaeee
portal for students seeking education loan. This ne lete 1042 | ; ferabl
portal has been developed under the guidance of commerce) +2 in any stream (preferably
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (BBA/BBM) in
Aeneas), DepErimsii: Gite hen Ee were ten (Mllneuny Business Administration/business management
of Education) and Indian Banks Association (IBA). OR
SUSIE ean view, apply and icles. the education Complete Bachelor’s degree and follow it up with
[stein eleiplieelehis Cold ut) Bios . Master's (MBA) in the same discipline
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Bihar, etc. oe
+ All banks give education loans.
 G) EXPECTED INCOME
“These figures are indicative & subject to change |
The approx. salary of an Inventory Manager
1 ranges between INR 15,200 — 83,400°
| per month
Source: https;//www.payscale.com/re-
1 search/IN/Job=Inventory_Manager/Salary _

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: Production Units, Private and Public EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
Production Companies, E-commerce Companies,
Courier Companies, Cottage based Industries, Shipping Inventory Clerk/Executive > Inventory
Companies, Military and so on. Supervisor/Assistant Manager >
Inventory Manager —> Senior inventory
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to manager > Head of Logistics
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is
applicable.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Management.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Deen Dayal Upadhyaya College, New Delhi
2. University of Jammu, Jammu & Kashmir
3. Maharaja Sayajirao University Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat
4. University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, Dehradun, Uttarakhand
5. Indian Institute of Management, Rohtak, Haryana
6. Doon University, Dehradun, Uttarakhand
7. Department of Management Sciences, Savitribai,
Phule Pune University, Pune, Maharashtra
8. Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management,
Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and
accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
]. Raisoni Group of Institutions, Nagpur, Maharashtra
2. Sunrise University, Alwar, Rajasthan
3. Army Institute of Management and Technology,
Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh
4. Sharanabasava University, Gulbarga, karnataka EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
5. Arcade Business College, Patna, Bihar Sarbani Sengupta started her career in the financial
6. Oxbridge Business School, Bengaluru, karnataka sector where she worked for 10 years before making
7. Jyoti Nivas College, Bengaluru, karnataka the shift to this industry. She has completed her
8. National Institute of Business Excellence, graduation in Economics, after which she pursued an
Bengaluru, karnataka MBA in Marketing from SVKM's Narsee Monjee
Institute of Management Studies (NMIMS). Today,
Information on Institute rankings is available at - she is the Vice President, Customer Service, DHL
https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html Express India.”
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE Source:http;//cargotalk.in/women-in-logistics-makin
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU), g-a-mark/
New Delhi , . .
‘The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains
678

Knowledge Process Outsourcing (KPO) is the process of outsourcing knowledge-intensive activities. The person who
is usually given the responsibility for the work is called a KPO executive and he or she usually has advanced degrees
and expertise in a specialized area.
‘—— gh |. :
“ea? ai
~ litt | =
ee A
Ae

- National Scholarship Portal - Visit

www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there

are Central Government schemes offered by

different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and

State Schemes’.

« Scholarships are also available in the institutes

based on merit’.

‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from

fime to time) [=I EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY

« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a 1. Complete 10+2 in Commerce or Science

portal for students seeking education loan. This stream (Physics, Chemistry, Mathematics)

portal has been developed under the guidance of 2. Complete a Bachelor’s degree (B.Com/BSc

the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of /BBM/ BBA) in Marketing/Finance/

Finance), Department of Higher Education (Ministry Accounting etc

of Education) and Indian Banks Association (IBA) OR

«Some states have student credit cards with low C let Bachelor's d foll db

interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha OMPNGTS G PACHSION'S GEGIEE TOVOwed BY F

ee ae. ‘ ‘ ‘ Master’s degree (MCom/MBA/MSc/MBM)

i in the same or related field
+ All banks give education loans
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Dee eee 679

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Investment Banks, Brokerage EXPECTED GROWTH PATH py”
Houses, Financial Institutions among others. ; ; ;
KPO Executive / Associate — Senior KPO
Work Environment: It is a desk job. At the entry Executive / Senior Associate —> KPO
level you will not handle any team. Local travel is Manager / Team Leader — Senior KPO
not a part of job profile. You are likely to have regu- Manager / Assistant Manager
lar work hours. You are likely to work 5 to 6 days a
week, 9 to 10 hours every day.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this
field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The courses are offered by the Department of Management. |
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES fe;
1. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi a
2. Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat
3. Shaheed Sukhdev College of Business Studies, New Delhi a r | 4,
4. Indian Maritime University, Kochi Campus, Kochi, Kerala “4
5. Gujarat University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat A
6. Doon University, Dehradun, Uttarakhand
7. University of Delhi, New Delhi
8. Ravenshaw University, Cuttack, Odisha "eo )
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated to the UGC before applying)
1. School of Business, University of Petroleum
and Energy Studies, Dehradun, Uttarakhand
2. School of Management Dr DY Patil University, Pune, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
Maharashtra
3. IBS Business School, Hyderabad, Telangana Vijay Bhise currently works as a team leader at
4. VIT Business School, Chennai, Tamil Nadu Shriram Transport Finance Company Limited,
5. Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi Mumbai. He previously worked as a KPO officer
6. AIMS Institutes, Bengaluru, Karnataka at Atos Syntel. Bhise has an MBA in Financial
7. Techno India University, Kolkata, West Bengal Management from Vidya Pratishthan's, Institute
of Information Technologym Maharastra and a
Bachelor's in Commerce from Tuljaram
Information on the institute rankings can be found Chaturchand College, Pune.”
at - http://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
Source: https://rocketreach.co/vijay-bhise-
email_ 112909814
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains
680

The primary role of a Purchasing and Materials Manager is to collaborate with other managers and
determine supply needs. They purchase the supplies according to the need of the industry. At times, they
also coordinate and supervise receiving and warehousing procedures.
Mar -
PERSONALITY TRAITS W. ;
¢ You like to keep your things organised. \
« You pay attention to details while working.
« You are comfortable communicating with others.
+ You like to lead. 7
Pa : & |
—
SCHOLARSHIPS
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there / J
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and —
State Schemes’. =I COURSE FEE
GY
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes Hii ieee he se wween
themselves based on merit. nt a
“These figures are estimated numbers and
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from will vary from Institute to Institute.
time to time)
LOANS
=! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a © verrrrcrscrecrreerrecnesnteesseeees
portal for students seeking education loan. This 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream (preferably
portal has been developed under the guidance of commerce)
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (BBA/BBM) in
Finance), Department of Higher Education (Ministry Business Administration/business management
of Education) and Indian Banks Association (IBA). OR
Students can view, apply and track the education Complete Bachelor’s degree and follow it up
loan applications on the website. with Master's (MBA) in the same discipline
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Bihar, etc. pon en enna nnn nn nn nnn nn nnn nnn een nn nnn ee nena
« All banks give education loans.
Ga EXPECTED INCOME
‘These figures are indicative & subject to change
' The approx. salary of a Purchasing and
i‘ Materials Manager ranges between
' INR 30,200 - 1,67,000* per month
' Source: https://www.payscale.com/re-
1 search/IN/Job=Materials_Manager/Salary a
QD eo 2 © © © © © © © ew 8 68]

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: Production Units, Private and Public EXPECTED GROWTH PATH f7
Production Companies, E-commerce Companies,
Courier Companies, Cottage based Industries, Shipping Management Trainee/Frontline
companies, Military and so on. Supervisor — Purchasing and Materials
Manager = Senior Purchasing and
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to Materials Manager — Logistics Head
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is
applicable.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Management.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Deen Dayal Upadhyaya College, New Delhi
2. University of Jammu, Jammu & Kashmir
3. Maharaja Sayajirao University Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat
4. University of Petroleum and Energy Studies , Dehradun, Uttarakhand
5. Indian Institute of Management, Ahemdabad, Gujarat
6. Doon University, Dehradun, Uttarakhand
7. Department of Management Sciences, Savitribai
Phule Pune University, Pune, Maharashtra
8. Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management,
Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and
accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying) Anusree Sen, the Deputy General Manager of the
1. Raisoni Group of Institutions, Nagpur, Maharashtra PDP Group, says that it took her a long time to prove
2. SunRise University, Alwar, Rajasthan her worth to her clients and her colleagues in this
3. Army Institute of Management and Technology, industry since she was a woman. She has completed
Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh an MBA in Human Resources
4. Sharanabasava University, Gulbarga, Karnataka Management/Personnel Administration from Sikkim
5. Arcade Business College, Patna, Bihar Manipal University. She first joined an international
6. Oxbridge Business School, Bengaluru, Karnataka freight forwarding company as a Customer Service
7. Jyoti Nivas College, Bengaluru, Karnataka Executive and has grown from there.”
8. National Institute of Business Excellence, Hosur,
Tamil Nadu Source: hitp;//cargotalk.in/women-in-logistics-makin
g-a-mark/
Information on Institute rankings is available at -
https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html *The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU),
New Delhi
682

RETAIL MANAGER LEDER EEE
Retail Managers manage a retail outlet's day to day /
functioning around selling of goods and services. They are @ ‘
responsible for the success of any retail store. A retail a
manager supervises store employees, maintains customer
satisfaction, and oversees inventory and stock /
management. ; ‘J
Bar
PERSONALITY TRAITS WY.
« You have excellent communication skills. »
+ You enjoy coordinating and planning.
« You enjoy solving problems. | FEES | COURSE FEE
Y The approx. course fee ranges between
INR 20,000 - 4,00,000*
“These figures are estimated numbers and
will vary from Institute to Institute.

SCHOLARSHIPS

« National Scholarship Portal - Visit

www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there EM EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY

are Central Government schemes offered by eee

different departments, UGC/AICTE schemes and 1. Complete 10+2 with any subject combination

state schemes’. 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.B.A.) in Retail

Management

*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from OR

time to time) Complete Bachelor's degree in Retail Management

and then pursue a Post Graduate Diploma in Retail

LOANS Management/Marketing

« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a OR

portal for students seeking education loan. This Complete Bachelor's degree in Retail Management

portal has been developed under the guidance of and then pursue MBA in Retail Management

the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of

Finance), Department of Higher Education (Ministry For admissions for Bachelor's degree, you must

of Education) and Indian Banks Association (IBA). qualify in one of these entrance examinations: CET,

Students can view, apply and track the education SET, DU JAT, SET etc. and for Post graduate

loan applications on the website. degree, you must qualify in any of the following

exams: CAT/ XAT/ GMAT/ SNAP/ NMAT/ CMAT.

« Some states have student credit cards with low . .

: g . Please check the duration of the course during enrolment

interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,

Bihar, etc.

- All banks give education loans. EXPECTED INCOME
on ‘These figures are taken from NCS and are
indicative and subject to change
| The approx. salary of a Retail Manager ranges!
between INR 25,000 - 75,000* per month
Source:https;//www.glassdoor.co.in/Salaries/r |
| etail-manager-salary-SRCH_KOO, 1 4.htm _

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: Retail Companies-stores, Showrooms,
Supermarkets, Department Store, Small Retail EXPECTED GROWTH PATH fi
Businesses.
Salesperson — Sales Supervisor, Retail
Work Environment: You will work in a desk and office Trade + Manager, Retail Trade >
oriented environment with supervisory responsibilities. General Manager, Retail Trade >
You will need to supervise a team of Senior Executives Director, Retail Trade > Working
and Executives. Some travelling may be involved. You Proprietor, Retail Trade
are expected to work 5 to 6 days a week and 8 to 9
hours per day. This varies from organization to
organization.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Management.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Madras Christian College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Lala Lajpat Rai College of Commerce and
Economics, New Delhi
3. Shaheed Sukhdev College of Business Studies, New Delhi
4. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi
5. Sydenham College of Commerce and Economics,
Mumbai, Maharashtra
6. Serampore College, Serampore, West Bengal
7. Government College, Dharamshala, Himachal Pradesh
8. Government College Autonomous, Rajahmundry, Andhra Pradesh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying)
1. Christ University, Bengaluru, Karnataka
2. Amity International Business School, Noida, Uttar Pradesh
3. Narsee Monjee, Mumbai, Maharashtra EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
Glo) oreh eli ef-p Cit hte Melulllietelh . Nandita Sinha who previously worked at Flipkart took
5. MCM DAV College for Women, Chandigarh
; ; the charge as CEO, Myntra on January 1, 2022. As
6. Dr. DY Patil Arts Commerce and Science College, Pune, . . .
Maharashtra part of her role, she is responsible for retail strategy
; and planning, business execution, supply-chain demand
FoR Caneel Cir McIne eel ssclieSe| 5p, ANT AME and customer satisfaction. Nandita Sinha holds an
Information on the institute rankingscan be found at - experience of over 16 years across ecommerce and
Iiace///anonvasiiaelivore/ 2023) ema lial FMCG. She began her career at Hindustan Unilever
; : : : Limited and later worked for Britannia Industries.”
Source:https///thenewsmen.co.in/high-flyers/nandita-sinha-know-th
e-ceo-of-myntra/87713
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE . ; . - ;
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) The above information Is for training purposes only and will not be
used for any commercial gains
684

A Rural Development Officer is a State Government official who is concerned with the development of rural areas.
He or she Is primarily responsible for supervising the developmental plans and their implementation to the areas
assigned to him or her. Rural Development Professionals study, plan, organize, direct and control ways to improve the
quality of life and economic welfare of the people living in rural areas. They make changes and improvements in the
agriculture, healthcare, education, social situations, economy, employment, management of natural resources,
banking and finance, technology, and industries majorly relating to the rural areas by handling farming schemes, old
age pension, schemes for specially-abled, NREGA, health and medical facilities, etc.
i——7h UN
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”. —
ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes 1. Completion of 10+2 in any stream
based on merit’. 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Rural Studies
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from /Rural Development/Rural
time to time) Management/Anthropology
OR
r . _ .. Complete Bachelor's degree in any discipline,
- VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, ie followed by Master's in Rural Development/
portal for students seeking education loan. This Rural Management or any related field
portal has been developed under the guidance of OR
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of . .
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks Pursue a Diploma in Rural Management/Rural
Association (IBA). Development
« Some states have student credit cards with low For admissions to management institutes offering
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, UG, PG courses in Rural Management, you must
Bihar, etc. qualify one these entrance examinations such as
: : CAT/XAT/IRMASAT/MAT/SNAP/
+ All banks give education loans. CMAT.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
685

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Panchayati Raj institutions, Rural
Cooperatives, NGOs, Agribusiness, Public or private EXPECTED GROWTH PATH w
sector Rural development initiatives, or leadership roles on Rural Development Specialist > Senior Rural
donor-funded agriculture development projects. Development Specialist > Rural
Development Manager — Senior Rural
Entepreneurship: You can start your own start up or a Development Manager
Non- Governmental Organisation to serve for the welfare
of the rural communities.
Work Envrionment: It involves extensive field work and
travel. Typically, you will have an office but also regularly
work in the field, depending on the type of organization
you would be working in.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Management.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University, Lucknow,
Uttar Pradesh
2. Mohanlal Sukhadia University, Udaipur, Rajasthan
3. Mahatama Gandhi Kashi Vidyapith University, Varanasi,
Uttar Pradesh
4. Sambalpur University, Sambalpur, Odisha
5. Kousalli Institute of Management Studies, Dharwad,
Karnataka
6. Jammu University, Jammu & Kashmir
7. Centre for Studies in Rural Management, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD ()
Gujarat Vidyapith, Gandhinagar, Gujarat Sahana Mishra has 24 years of experience
8. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, working on gender, sustainable agriculture, and
Maharashtra natural resource management. She has worked
extensively in building women collectives for their
PRIVATE INSTITUTES socio-economic-political empowerment. Sahana
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited with has worked closely with government
UGC before applying) departments in MP, Odisha, and Bihar. She is
; skilled in designing and implementing large-scale
1. KIIT School of Rural Management, Bhubaneswar, Odisha development projects at the grassroots in
2. Indian Institute of Management, Calcutta, West Bengal partnership seats government ama
3. Institute of Rural Management, Jaipur, Rajasthan non-government agencies. She is a Graduate in
4. Institute of Rural Management Anand, Gujarat Economics and has a Post Graduate Diploma in
5. Xavier Institute of Social Service, Ranchi, Jharkhand Rural Management and was a fellow in the
6. Xavier Institute of Management, Bhubaneswar, Odisha Leadership Development Program at McCain
; . ; Institute of International Leadership in the USA.
Information on the institute rankings can be found
at - https:;//www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html Source: https;//www.pradan.net/who-we-
are/#ourteam
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) “The above information is for training purposes only and will
686 not be used for any commercial gains

Sales and Marketing is an important corporate function focused on marketing the service/ product and
converting demands into sales. Sales and marketing managers develop marketing strategy, conduct
market research, develop promotions and advertising, handle public relations etc.
\— ? eco
Man
PERSONALITY TRAITS W. 1 >
+ You like to try to persuade or influence people. o
* You have excellent communication skills. y=
+ You like to set new goals for yourself. |
| FEES |
SCHOLARSHIPS —Y COURSE FEE
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit YF The approx. course fee ranges between
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there INR 1,00,000 — 3,00,000°*
are Central Government schemes offered by “These figures are estimated numbers and
different departments, UGC/AICTE schemes and will vary from Institute fo Institute.
state schemes’.
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from
time to time)
=! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream
portal for students seeking education loan. This 2. Complete Bachelor's degree from any stream,
portal has been developed under the guidance of followed by PG Diploma/Master’s degree in
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Business Administration (M.B.A.)
Finance), Department of Higher Education (Ministry
of Education) and Indian Banks Association (IBA). For admissions for Bachelor's degree, you must
Students can view, apply and track the education qualify in one of these entrance examinations: CET,
loan applications on the website. SET, DU JAT, SET etc. and for post graduate
degree, you must qualify in any of the following
- Some states have student credit cards with low exams: CAT/ XAT/ GMAT/ SNAP/ NMAT/ CMAT.
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Bihar, etc.
- All banks give education loans.
Ga EXPECTED INCOME
“The figures are indicative & subject to change
| The approx. salary of Sales and Marketing |
| Manager ranges between
INR 24,000 - 84,000* per month.
| Source: https://www.payscale.com/research/| |
| N/Job=Sales_and_Marketing Manager/Salary |: :
Qi 687

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: Corporate houses, MNCs, Private
Companies, Corporations, Banks. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7"
Work Environment: It involves local/countrywide Sales Representative — Sales Supervisor
travelling. You may have to lead a team. Working > Area Sales Manager — Regional Sales
hours vary day to day. Manager/Zonal Sales Manager >
General Sales Manager — Director Sales
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Management or Commerce.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institutes of Management, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
2. Indian Institutes of Management, Bengaluru, Karnataka
3. Indian Institutes of Management, Kolkata, West Bengal
4. Department of Management Studies, New Delhi
5. Sydenham College of Commerce and Economics, Mumbai, Maharashtra
6. Indian Institutes of Management, Kozhikode, Kerala
7. \ndian Institutes of Management, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
8. Madras Christian College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying)
1. Amity University, Raipur/ Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh
2. PP Savani University, Surat, Gujarat
3. Lal Bahadur Shastri Institute of Technology & EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
Management, Indore, Madhya Pradesh . ; . a
4. University of Technology, Jaipur, Rajasthan Gautam Vijh has been in the thick of action in
5. Institute of Management & Research, New Delhi sectors as varied ie appliances to tyres and
6. IBMR IBS, Bengaluru, Karnataka finally at Ranbaxy in Global Consumer
7. Institute of Management & Research, Ghaziabad, Healthcare (GCHC), looking after UP,
Uttar Pradesh Uttaranchal, Bihar, Jharkhand and Odisha. A
8. Narsee Monjee, Mumbai, Maharashtra commerce graduate with a diploma in
management from Lucknow, Vijh believes that
he can operate in any given condition. He
Information on the institute rankingscan be found at - started his career 2 io Distributor salesman,
https;//www-nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html working with Philips Lighting, Godfrey Phillips
and MRF Tyres and moved on to more diverse
roles that led him to apply his learning and
experience. He is now Regional Sales Manager,
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE Central with Ranbaxy."
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
Source: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/meet-indias
-top-salesmen/articleshow/768185.cms
‘The above information is for training purposes only and
688 will not be used for any commercial gains

A Sports Manager plays a vital role in getting support, overseeing athletic activities, and dealing with the business
side of a sport. Managers are responsible for ensuring that athletes have the required resources to train effectively.
Mar y
PERSONALITY TRAITS Ww. /
4
+ You enjoy sports. , ¢ Py
+ You like to work in teams. la
« You can comfortably talk with everyone. We? ~—\
« You are quick to take on new responsibilities. ) eS w_|
( 10
———s
: Re. |
SCHOLARSHIPS — a a=
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit Ge
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there J
are Central Government schemes offered by \ sg
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’. | FEES | COURSE FEE
Y The approx. course fee ranges between
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes INR 25,000 - 5,00,000°
based on merit’. ‘These figures are estimated numbers and
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Pell Wainy wre Inne to Lei
time to time)
LOANS [Fg EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream
portal has been developed under the guidance of 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (BBA/
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of B.Com) in Business Management/Sports
Finance), Department of Higher Education (Ministry management
of Education) and Indian Banks Association (IBA). ,
Complete a Bachelor’s degree followed by a
eSome states have student credit cards with low al s degree (MBA/M.Com) in the same field
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Pursue a Diploma in Sports Management
Bihar, etc.
- All banks give education loans. Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Gs EXPECTED INCOME
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of a Sports Manager or
1 Agent ranges between INR 64,185 -
| 1,10,592* per month.
‘Source: httos;//www.salaryexpert.com/ i
‘| salary/job/sports-management/india les
<i) ee eee ee ee ee ee 8 689

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Professional sports teams, Minor EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
league teams, College or high school level athletics
etc. Assistant Manager > Sports Manager
OR
Entrepreneurship: You can start your own business of Assistant Manager > Sports Manager
sports management. > Sports Director
OR
Work Environment: You will work in an office setting, Assistant Manager > Sports Manager
but during an athletic season, you may be required — CEO of own business
to travel for events and/or work extended hours. You
are likely to hold meetings with other athletics
professionals, team members, media persons or
partners. While you will be working regular hours, you
are likely to put in more hours during sports season.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Management.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad University of Technology, Kolkata, West Bengal
2. Indian Institute of Social Welfare and Business Management, Kolkata, West Bengal
3. Indian Institutes of Management, Rohtak, Haryana
4. Alagappa University, Karaikudi, Tamil Nadu
5. Jai Narain Vyas University, Jodhpur, Rajasthan
6. Swarnim Gujarat Sports University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat
7. SNDT Womens University, Mumbai, Maharashtra
8. Tamil Nadu Physical Education and Sports University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD Gg
with UGC before applying) : : :
1. International Institute of Sports & Management, Wilbur Lasrado is player Relation
Mumbai. Maharashtra Manager with Inventive Sports UK. He
2. George College, Kolkata, West Bengal aes seigole nm Monagement d
3. Ironwood Sports Management Global Academy, Mumbai, Studies. The 25-year-o Is consiaers
Maharashtra one of the most prominent agents in
4. Syamaprasad Institute of Technology and Management, Kolkata, Indian football. He has been
West Bengal managers of players such as Aaron
5. School of Management Dr. DY Patil University, Pune, Maharashtra D'costa, Augustin ener oak
6. KJ Somaiya Institute of Management, Mumbai, Maharashtra Sawant, soey ee u, Biaklian
7. MIT School of Management, Pune, Maharashtra he an Abhishek Das among
8. ISBR Business School, Bengaluru, Karnataka otners.
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - oortey it aoe or paired
https; snirfindia.org/2023/ranking.html SPOTTS/MAKING-Toonmamageni-
ps//wwwanirfinaia.org/2023/ranking wilbur-lasrado-342430
‘The above information is for training purposes
only and will not be used for any commercial
690 gains

Sports Equipment Managers are responsible for stocking, organizing, maintaining and monitoring equipment and
apparels used by a sports team. They also ensure that all equipment meets safety requirements before being utilized
by players.
) >) . >
eS * 2 \e
e \\
PERSONALITY TRAITS wr. ve a ae Ny
+ You enjoy sports. é sv ‘= = a
+ You like working in a team. ge { Ks Las -
¢ You are quick to take on new responsibilities. ea
+ You like to organize things. x = Y _
CRI Oe
ex
SCHOLARSHIPS
- National Scholarship Portal - Visit | a | COURSE FEE
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there Y The approx. course fee ranges between
are Central Government schemes offered by INR 20 000 — 5.00,000* for the full course
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and ; ‘
State Sch rt These figures are estimated numbers and
ate 2enemMes will vary from Institute to Institute.
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes
based on merit” [=4, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Terence eee
time to time) 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream
2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Sports
LOANS Management
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Complete Bachelor's dearee. followed by a
portal for students seeking education loan. This M ° sin th me f ic ‘ Y
portal has been developed under the guidance of OR. ers ining same ne
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Complete Bachelor's degree, followed by a
Finance), Department of Higher Education (Ministry certification course ‘
of Education) and Indian Banks Association (IBA). OR
Complete Bachelor's degree then take up an
«Some states have student credit cards with low internship in the sports industry, followed by
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Master's in Sports Management
Bihar, etc.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
+ All banks give education loans. TTS TTT
le" EXPECTED INCOME
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of a Sports Equipment |
i Manager ranges between INR 9,000 —
i 1,26,042* per month.
Source: https;//in.talent.com/salary?job= |
| @quipment+manager 1, °
EEE DDD DDD 091

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Professional sports teams, Minor league EXPECTED GROWTH PATH fi
teams, College or High school level athletics and Sports
equipment companies, etc. Assistant Equipment Manager — Equipment
Manager — Administrative Assistant
Entrepreneurship: You can start your own sports OR
management company. Assistant Equipment Manager — Equipment
Manager —> High-level Role in a Sports
Work Environment: You are likely to work in the Equipment Company
equipment room of the sports facility, such as stadium,
arena, or gymnasium. Typically, you will work around
45 hours a week but you may need to work extra hours
during peak season for the sport you are involved in. The
job can be physically demanding, as you must be able to
lift and carry heavy equipment.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Management.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad University of Technology, Kolkata,
West Bengal
2. Indian Institute of Social Welfare and Business Management,
Kolkata, West Bengal
3. Indian Institutes of Management, Rohtak, Haryana
4. Alagappa University, Karaikudi, Tamil Nadu
5. Jai Narain Vyas University, Jodhpur, Rajasthan
6. Swarnim Gujarat Sports University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat
7. SNDT Womens University, Mumbai, Maharashtra
8. Tamil Nadu Physical Education and Sports University, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu
PRIVATE INSTITUTES = EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying) Deepesh Gawand is the equipment manager for
1. International Institute of Sports & Management, Mumbai City Football club. He has done his
Mumbai, Maharashtra Bachelor's in Mechanical Engineering from Agnel
2. George College, Kolkata, West Bengal Polytechnic, Vashi, Mumbai. Earlier, Gawand
3. Ironwood Sports Management Global Academy, Mumbai, played football under the Navi Mumbai Sports
Maharashtra Association.”
4. Syamaprasad Institute of Technology and Management,
Kolkata, West Bengal Source: https://twitter.com/gawanddeepesh
5. School of Management Dr. DY Patil University, Pune,
Maharashtra “The above information is for training purposes only and will
6. KJ Somaiya Institute of Management, Mumbai, Maharashtra not be used for any commercial gains
7. MIT School of Management, Pune, Maharashtra
8. ISBR Business School, Bengaluru, Karnataka
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/ranking. html
692

Operations, Logistics,
and Hospitality a.
Pry es
ee
Sy’

SZ @
OF as
a
lap £°
=o OL
A & al
Paw Hy TI
i e
= @ ¢
MD Co) a
OL
59 0
a » ©) &

Air Hostess is responsible for ensuring the safety and comfort of
passengers on both national and international flights.
Q'
>
a i
Mar A
| a
PERSONALITY TRAITS W. —_ \
« Excellent communication skills 9+.
+ Physical stamina
« Empathy and compassion
« Problem solving abilities
Fees | COURSE FEE
nye The approx. course fee ranges between
/ INR 80,000 - 3,00,000"
SCHOLARSHIPS ‘These figures are estimated numbers and
. . .. will vary from Institute to Institute.
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and =] EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
State Schemes.” ES ceceeceeeecseeseeeeeneeeeeatees
e Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream
ee hitps://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/ 2. Complete a Bachelor's in Air Hostess
is A government initiative providing skill training Training/Aviation/Hospitality and Travel
and certification in various sectors, with financial M g 1/T Pp dT ye
support based on course type. anagement/ trave! and fourism
Not A ticeshi > tion Scheme Management/International Airline and Travel
¢ National Apprenticeship Promotion Sche .
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ on genet or any related subject.
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain are
on-the-job training at approved organizations in romplere mn s , nt rostess |
the aviation and logistics sector. vaning/ atte vod y and trave
- } . oe anagement/Travel and Tourism
> AICTE- Visit https///www.cicte-india.org/ Management/International Airline and Travel
offers scholarships and fellowships to students Management or any related subject, followed by
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These Master's in th llied fi id,
financial aids support technical and management g Masters In te same or aied neld.
courses. OR
; . — Pursue a Diploma or Certficate Course in Air
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes Hostess Training/Crew/Flight Attendant
based en meri Training/Aviation and Hospitality
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Management/Aviation Customer Care/Hospitality
time to time) and Travel Management or any other related
subject.
LOANS Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a I
portal for students seeking education loan. This EXPECTED INCOME
portal has been developed under the guidance of oe") “These figures are indicative and subject to change.
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks The approx. salary of an Air Hostess ranges
Association (IBA). | between INR 25,000 - 80,000* or more
« Some states have student credit cards with low | per month.
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, a IE content-repository/Pag- |
Bihar, etc. tails.aspx?NCSCode=5 1 1 1.0300&Source=https://www.ncs.go
; 8 6 v.in/content-repository/Pages/ViewNcos.aspx?FilterField]=In | ° °
Al ehie gine Gelugel tem [eter 1 dustry _x002F_Sector_x0028_s x0&FilterValuel=Aerospace% 1° °
Qi 1 20and%20Aviation it
a ©)

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?

Places of Work: Commercial airlines EXPECTED GROWTH PATH f7

Work Environment: It is a field job. Travel is an Trainee — Flight Attendants and Travel

important aspect of the job profile. You are likely Stewards — Head Flight Attendant

to work 5 to 6 days a week with a maximum of

65 hours in 7 consecutive days.

Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field.

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This list of institutes which offer Air Hostess training is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Annai Indira Air Hostess Training Academy, Kanyakumari, Tamil Nadu

2. Periyar University, Periyar, Tamil Nadu

3. Aditi Mahavidyalaya, New Delhi 7)

(

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

]. Frankfinn Institute of Air Hostess Training, across India

2. Western India Institute of Aeronautics, Ahmedabad, Gujarat

3. Flywheel Aviation Academy, Nagpur,Maharashtra —

4. Aptech Aviation Academy, Kolkata, West Bengal s

5. PTC - Aviation Academy, Bengaluru,Karnataka

6. The Bombay Flying Club, Mumbai,Maharashtra

7. Universal Aviation Academy, Chennai,Tamil Nadu

8. Center for Civil Aviation Training, New Delhi

= i.
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Gopika Govind became the first Scheduled Tribe woman
to fly as an air hostess in Kerala in September 2022. She
has a Master’s in Chemistry following which she opted for
a Diploma in IATA (Indian Aviation Training Academy)
customer service care at Dream Sky Aviation Training
Academy in Wayanad.”
Source: hitps;//www.newindianexpress.com/good-
news/2022/sep/0 1/12-year-old-dream-comes-
true-kerala-tribal-girl-becomes-air-hostess-
2493590.html
‘The above information is for training purposes only and will not be used
696 for any commercial gains

AIRTRAFFIC CONTROLLER \
~~ ~N
. . . . . . 0
Air Traffic Controller is in charge of remotely monitoring G re
and directing the movements of aircrafts to ensure their ~~) a —
safety and also minimize delay. O'S a
) /
Si Ze
bs Jt
ZA)
a Z ANS
i KSEE
Ay 2 QA
A
@F
¢ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the —\
Government of India for economically backward )
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
« Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this
scheme. *
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The |OC Ltd offers
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical =
disabilities, women and students from North East and Ee EDUCATIONAL PATHWAYS —
J&K."
et Pore] Se haleeso Der itlewWfan 1. Complete 10+2 in Science stream.
wwwscholarships.govin. Under this portal there are 2.Complete Bachelor's degree in Engineering
Central Government schemes offered by different (especialy Fompyter Science, Telecommunication,
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” ectrical, Electronic, or Radio Engineering).
¢ Scholarships are also available in institutes based on To become an Air Traffic Controller in India, you
merit.” . a we
_ : : : must qualify Civil ATC Test, which is administered by
*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) the Civil Aviation Authority
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of Ga
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
+ Some States have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
+ All banks give education loans.
tee eee eee ee ee 697

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: You will usually be stationed in Air traffic EXPECTED GROWTH PATH w/
control centers and Control towers.
Trainee — Assistant Air Traffic Controller >
Work Environment: You will usually work around 8 hours a Air Traffic Controller — Air Traffic
week, but this is spread out over days, nights, weekends Controller Specialist
and public holidays. Air traffic control has to be manned
24 hours a day, so shift work is used to ensure there is
always someone there.
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Aeronautical or Aerospace
Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu \\ [}
2. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh st. A oad —Jb /
3. Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati, Assam — ea =
4. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra wall
5. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal
6. National Institute of Technology, Trichy, Tamil Nadu / .
>So aln e IN
PRIVATE INSTITUTES ew
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying) nd 90588 ~~ (7) 4
1. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal,Karnataka 009g? AN
2. Hind Institute of Technology and Science, Chennai, Tamil Nadu \
3. Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh J)
4. Thapar Institute of Engineering and Technology, Patiala, Punjab =
5. Birla Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu \ CT
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
Shyamli Haldar became the first woman Air Traffic Controller
in the country to head the ATC at Kolkata in 2020. Halder
belongs to the first batch of nine women traffic controllers
recruited three decades ago, in 1989. She trained at the Civil
Aviation Training College in Allahabad, after which she was
posted in Kolkata in 1991. She and her batchmate, Aryama
Sanyal, were the only women Air Traffic Controllers then.”
Source: https;//timesofindia.indiatimes.com/
city/kolkata/skys-the-limit-for- 1 st-woman-atc-boss/articlesh
ow/79538434.cms
‘The above information is for training purposes only and will not be used for
any commercial gains.
698

Aircraft pilot is a professional who is qualified to fly an aircraft. " : i /
In India, a pilot can either be in civil aviation or Indian Defence
Forces. Fy
e Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the
first year of their engineering undergraduate course.
Eligibility includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
research. sisaeseerscseeceeneceenecenesees
¢ National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme For Civil Aviation (Non-Military) .
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ 1. Complete ] O+2 in Science stream (Mathematics,
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain Physics and Chemistry). _
on-the-job training at approved organizations in 2. Complete a flying course from an aviation
the aviation and logistics sector. institute and apply for commercial or pilot license
e Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers OR , . Lo.
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Complete Bachelor's degree in Aviation .
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate Management ora BBA in aviation and then enrol in
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students an aviation institute.
with physical disabilities, women and students from
North East and J&K.* For Defence Forces:
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit 1. Complete ] O+2 in Science (Mathematics,
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are Physics and Chemistry).
Central Government schemes offered by different 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in any Science
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State subject and then appear for any one of the
Schemes.” following exams: AFCAT (Air Force Common
¢ Scholarships are also available in institutes based on Admission Test) NDA (Union Public Service
merit.” Commission National Defence Academy and Naval
oe ’ : : Academy Exam) (Exam can be taken directly after
(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) Class 12), CDSE (Union Public Service Commission
Combined Defence Services).
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of e-
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
« Some States have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar,
etc. .
¢ All banks give education loans. an
°° 699

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
~ y
es 7 CG y
~—«,
fo
This course is offered by the Department of Aviation.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Ahmedabad Aviation & Aeronautics Ltd.,
Ahmedabad,Gujarat
2. Bihar Flying Institute, Patna,Bihar
3. Flytech Aviation Academy, Hyderabad,Telangana
4. Government Aviation Training Institute,
Bhubneswar,Odisha
5. Government Flying Training School,
Bengaluru,Karnataka
6. Mumbai University, Mumbai,Maharashtra
7. Chhatrapati Shahu Ji Maharaj University, Kanpur, Uttar
Pradesh
8. Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Udan Akademi, Fursatganj,
Uttar Pradesh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
before applying)
1. Asia Pacific Flight Training Academy,
Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Academy of Carver Aviation, Mumbai,Maharashtra
3. Alchemist Aviation, Jamshedpur,Jharkhand
4. Ambitions Flying Club, Harigarh,Uttar Pradesh
5. Blue Ray Aviation Pvt.Ltd. Osmanabad
Airfield|Khed,Maharashtra
6. Vels Institute of Science, Technology & Advanced
Studies, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
7. Banasthali Vidyapeeth, Jaipur,Rajasthan
8. Pune Institute of Aviation Technology,
Pune,Maharashtra
700

> + \e
Oa
(LY
aw ae p
— \
e |] @
eje
« You can comfortably talk with everyone
¢ You are physically fit
* You are good at keeping records of your work
The approx. course fee ranges between
INR 7,000 — 70,000°
*(The above-mentioned figures are approximate
numbers. This will vary from institute to institute)

e Certificate- Minimum qualification is typically
10th or 12th pass. Peruse certificate in Cargo
Handling, certificate in Air Cargo Operations.

e Diploma- 10th, 12th pass, or graduates
depending on the institution. Peruse Diploma in Air
Cargo Management, Diploma in Logistics and Air
Cargo.

e Undergraduate- Completion of 12th standard
(10+2) with a minimum required percentage
(varies by institution). Peruse BBA in Logistics and
Cargo., B.Sc. in Aviation or related fields.

e Postgraduate- Bachelor's degree in a related
field (e.g., logistics, aviation, or management).
Peruse MBA in Aviation and Cargo Management,
PG Diploma in Logistics and Supply Chain
Management.

e Doctoral- Master's degree in a relevant field with
research potential. Peruse PhD in Logistics and
Supply Chain Management.

e Short-Term Courses- Peruse IATA Air Cargo
Introductory Course, Air Cargo Security and
Operations Training.

Please check the duration of the course during enrolment

. ‘These figures are taken from NCS and are indicative
and subject to change .
The approx. salary of an Airline Cargo
Assistant ranges between INR 15,000 -
24,500* per month.
Source: hitps;//in.talent.com/salary?job
=cargo+assistant
701

Airline Cargo Assistant — Aircraft Cargo
Handling Supervisor — Manager
Operations — Regional Head
SOME OF THE INSTITUTES, WHICH OFFERS COURSES IN
AIR CARGO MANAGEMENT.
(This list of institutes is indicative only)
1. The International Air Transport Association, Kochi,Kerala
2. Airborne Academy, New Delhi
3. Parul University, Vadodara,Gujarat
4. Panache Academy, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
5. Blue Whale Academy, Mumbai,Maharashtra
6. Fortune Aviation Academy, Dehradun,Uttarakhand
7. PTC Aviation Academy, Chennai,Tamil Nadu
& 4 \
\
Rijesh Kumar currently works as a senior customer
service agent with Air India. Between April 1, 2008
to March 31, 2009 he worked as a cargo assistant
with Air India Calicut International Airport. His
responsibilities included weighing cargo,
preparation of export cargo and updating of
Import/Export Register among others. Kumar has
done his Bachelor's in Mathematics from MG
University Kottayam, Kerala.”
Source: https;//people.bayt.com/rijeshkumar
-vk/
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains
702

an)
7
* You can comfortably talk with everyone
« You are quick to take on new responsibilities
¢ You like trying to help people solve their problems
Diploma Level: INR 30,000 - 1,50,000* for
the entire course
Undergraduate: INR 1,00,000 - 4,00,000*
per year
“(The above mentioned figures are approximate numbers.
This will vary from Institute to Institute)
Minimum Qualification
1. Complete 10+2 in any stream
OR
Earn two years of work experience
OR
Complete Class 10 followed by an ITI course
(Engineering or Non-Engineering)
2. Enrol for National Skills Qualification
Framework (NSQF)" level 4 Certificate
course - Airline Customer Service Executive
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
“These figures are taken from NCS and are indicative
and subject to change .
The approx. salary of an Airline Customer
Service Executive ranges between
INR 18,000 - 22,000* per month.
Source:
https;//www.ambitionbox.com/salaries/air-i
ndia-salaries/customer-service-executive
703

Customer Service Officer — Customer
Service Executive — Customer Care
Senior Executive — Assistant Manager —
Manager
The course is offered by the Department of Management.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management, Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh
2. National Institute for Enterpreneurship and Small Business Management, Noida,Uttar Pradesh
3. National Institue of Aviation Traing and Management, Mumbai,Maharashtra
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
1. Frankfinn Institute of Air Hostess Training, Kolkata, West Bengal
2. Aptech Aviation and Hospitality Academy, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh
3. Airborne Airhostess Academy, New Delhi
4. Patron International, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
5. Shastri Academy of Excellence, Kasgang, Uttar Pradesh
6. Narayan College, Bareilly, Uttar Pradesh
J ivcrravson ~ ¢ P \) Shibin Vincent currently works as Aircraft
~ rl oe 4 } Turnaround Supervisor with Emirates Airline. Earlier,
Vincent worked as Airline Customer Service
| Executive with Indigo. He has also worked with Air
Arabia and SpiceJet. He has completed B.Sc in
Ss. Information Technology from Madurai Kamara|
i“ University and an MBA in Airline and Airport
Management from Alagappa University, Tamil
_ == Nadu.*
. a \ Source: https;//www.slideshare.net/
— shibinvincent5/shibin-cv-final
a
A “The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains
704 -

b
a
“« ~
|
= Po
4
¢ You are physically fit on
+ You like to have clear instructions to follow
- You pay attention to details while working
Diploma: INR 30,000 — 1,50,000°
Undergraduate: INR1,00,000 - 4,00,000*
per year
Postgraduate: INR 2,00,000 — 6,00,000*
per year
“(The above mentioned figures are approximate numbers.
This will vary from Institute to Institute)
Diploma
Duration: 6 months to 1 year
Eligibility: 10+2 qualification (higher secondary).
Example: Diploma in Ground Handling & GSE Operation,
Diploma in Airport Ground Services & Equipment, Diploma in
Aviation Ground Support Equipment.
Undergraduate
Duration: 3 years
Eligibility: 10+2 (higher secondary education) in any stream.
Example: B.Sc. in Airport Ground Services, Bachelor's in
Aviation Management, BBA in Airport and Airline
Management (with specialization in GSE), BBA in Aviation
and Ground Handling.
Postgraduate
Duration: 1 to 2 years
Eligibility: Graduation in any discipline (preferred background
in aviation, hospitality, or logistics).
Example: MBA in Aviation Management, Master’s in Aviation
Safety and Ground Services, M.Sc. in Aviation Management,
Postgraduate Diploma in Airport Operations and Ground
Support Equipment.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
‘These figures are taken from NCS and are indicative
and subject to change
The approx. salary of an Airline Ground
Support Equipment Operator ranges
between INR 13,300 - 15,000* per month.
Source - https://www.ambitionbox.com/
salaries/onshore-construction-salaries/store-
keeper
705

Airline Ground Support Equipment
operator — Supervisor (Level 5)

INSTITUTES

(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)

1. Gujarat University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat

2. Skywings Academy of Aviation and

Tourism, Kochi, Kerala

3. The Bombay Flying Club, Mumbai,Maharashtra

4. Aptech Aviation Academy, Mumbai,Maharashtra

5. Thakur Institute of Aviation, Mumbai,Maharashtra

6. Panache Academy, Panjim, Goa

7. Aptech Aviation Academy, Mumbai,Maharashtra

8. Thakur Institute of Aviation, Mumbai,Maharashtra

9. Aimfill International, Chennai, Tamil Nadu.

10. Panache Academy, Ahmedabad , Gujarat

11. Thakur Institute of Aviation Technology, Mumbai,Maharashtra

Information on the institute rankings can be found at -

www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.htm!
Sakshi Singh did a short term course at an institute
in Delhi and is now working successfully as
supervisor ground staff with Air India. She
attributes her success to her training.”
Source - tmiacademy.com/placements.php

v] ‘The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains

: ~

. z =z

»— [ Ve ons
| =
. H He :
ms | :
©) -

/ Zh _
An auctioneer is a public sale where goods are sold to the ( v ——
person who offers the highest price. And an auctioneer is the “a i
person who conducts the auction. W
A
— [|
[|
—
3 | °
5
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes.”
¢ Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY)
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/
is A government initiative providing skill training
and certification in various sectors, with financial
support based on course type.
¢ National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain
on-the-job training at approved organizations in E EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
the aviation and logistics sector. AQ viccccccesecceneeeeeseenensenees
¢ AICTE- Visit https://www.aicte-india.org/ 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream.
offers scholarships and fellowships to students 2. Complete a Bachelor’s degree (BA/LLB/
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These BSc) in any subject.
financial aids support technical and management 3. Master's degree Art History/Business
COIS Ss. Administration/Law.
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes 4. Ph.D. in Art History/Business Administration/Law.
based on merit.” (If you intend to work for art galleries then
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from you will need a degree in Fine Arts)
time to time)
Please check the duration of the course during
enrolment.
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of Ga
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc. ee
« All banks give education loans. i
Dee eee eee 707

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Auction Houses, Government- EXPECTED GROWTH PATH pi
regulated Online Auctioning Platforms, Art Galleries,
Courts etc. Assistant Auctioneer — Joint Auctioneer >
Auctioneer
Work Environment: Part-time work and contractual
jobs may be available. You are likely to work 5 to 6
days a week 8 to 9 hours every day.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
Institutes which offer courses in Fine Arts.
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi
2. Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh
3. Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune, Maharashtra
4, University of Lucknow, Lucknow,Uttar Pradesh
5. Chhatrapati Shahu ji Maharaj University, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
6. Punjab University, Chandigarh
7. Maharaja Sayajirao University, Vadodara, Gujarat
8. Rabindra Bharati University, Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying)
1. Manipal university of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka
2. Lovely Professional University, Jalandhar, Punjab
3. Chandigarh University, Chandigarh
4. National Institute of Medical Sciences University, Jaipur,
ti itu ical Sciences University, Jaipur EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Rajasthan
oleae a Mea arate Mallika Sagar is a specialist in modern and
a ners unter i wy Ber | contemporary Indian art. She is an auctioneer at the
, amas niversity, ° : ata,| est enga Pundole’s Auction House in Mumbai. The Board of
8. Noida International University, Noida,Uttar Pradesh Control for Cricket in India (BCCI) has roped in her
. , . as the auctioneer for the Women’s Premier League
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - ; ; exo ;
httos:// find /2023/Rankina.htm| 2023 auction. After completing her major in Art His-
tips.//www.nirtinala.org anking.ntm tory from Bryn Mawr College in Philadelphia, she
b h + Christie’s in 2001, being its first
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE woman auotioneer of indian orig —
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) ;
Source: https;//sportstar.thehindu.com/cricket/-
womens-cricket/mallika-sagar-wpl-auctioneer
-womens-premier-league-2023-february- 1 3-
mumbai-team-players-list/article6649632 1.ece
*The above information is for training purposes only and will not
708 be used for any commercial gains

Bartenders prepare and serve beverages and food to
customers. They mix and garnish cocktails and non-alcoholic
beverages.
Bar \ ~
PERSONALITY TRAITS Wy.
+ You can comfortably talk with everyone : iq
e You like to work in teams A
« You like to do experiments Vv !
¢ You pay attention to details
e Have knowledge on alcoholic and
non-alcoholic beverages
rees | COURSE FEE
wy The approx. course fee ranges between
% INR 50,000 - 80,000" per month.
SCHOLARSHIPS i
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit ‘These figures are estimated numbers and
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there will vary from Institute to Institute.
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes =| EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
e Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) ES bene eeee eee ees ees aeenaeenaaes
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/ 1. Complete 10 +2 in any stream
is A government initiative providing skill training mn C lete a Bachelor's in Hot | M tand
and certification in various sectors, with financial “Lomplete a pachelor’s in morel Management an
support based on course type. Catering Technology/ Catering Science and Hotel
National Apprenticeshio Promotion Scheme Management/Hospitality and Hotel Administration
e Nationa i i ion Sche' . ves
(NAPS) - Vit www-apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ or any related field and followed by a certificate
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain course on Bartending
on-the-job training at approved organizations in OR
the aviation and logistics sector. Complete a Bachelor's in Hotel Management and
¢ AICTE- Visit https://www.aicte-india.org/ Catering Technology/Catering science and Hotel
offers scholarships and fellowships to students Management/ Hospitality and Hotel Administration
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These or any related field, followed by a Master's in the
financial aids support technical and management same subject or related field and opt for a
courses. certificate course on Bartending
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes OR . ; ; .
oeReal Op MAUL Pursue a Diploma course in Professional Bartending
a ; or Mixology and Flair Bartending.
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from
time to time) Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
LOANS ee
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, iso | e EXPECTED INCOME
portal for students seeking education loan. This | ‘These figures are indicative and subject to change.
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of | The approx. salary of a Bartender ranges
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks 1 between INR 10,000 - 59,000* or more |
Association (IBA). 1 per month.
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, i Source: https;//www.payscale.com/re-
Bihar, etc. Q | search/IN/Job=Bartender/Salary
¢ All banks give education loans. Po 709

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Restaurants with bars, Pubs, Upscale EXPECTED GROWTH PATH fy”
hotels with bars and night clubs among others. ;
Bar Boy or Bar Waitress — Assistant
Entrepreneurship: You could be a freelance bartender Bartender — Bartender — Assistant Bar
Manager — Bar Manager
Work Environment: You will have to handle a wide
range of customers. You are likely to work long hours,
including evenings and weekends, when restaurants are
busiest.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This list of institutes offering courses in Bartending is indicative only
INSTITUTES
1. European Bartender School, Verna, Goa
2. Barcraft Bartending Academy, Bengaluru, Karnataka
3. Chennais Amirta International Institute of Hotel Management, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
4. Cocktails and Dreams Bartending School, New Delhi
5. Heritage Institute of Hotel & Tourism, Shimla,Himachal Pradesh
6. Institute of Hotel Management Catering & Nutrition, New Delhi
7. Indian Institute of Bartending, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
8. Institute of Bar Operations and Management, New Delhi
9. Institute of Hotel Management Catering Technology & Applied Nutrition, Bardez, Goa
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD EJ
Yangdup Lama is one of the foremost bartender and mixologist in
India. He was born in Kurseong and after completing his 10+2, he
Mp studied Hotel Management from Kolkata. His first job was in the
Hyatt Regency, Delhi, as a food and beverage server in 1995
\ where he took to bartending and worked at the Polo Lounge Bar in
\ the hotel. From there, Lama went on to open his own mobile bar-
, ; | tending service company called Cocktails & Dreams. He then
4 opened his own bar in Gurugram and bar training and beverage
" management company in Delhi.”
Source: https;//www.telegraphindia.com/my-kolkata/food/yang-
dup-lama-stirred-up-his-signature-concoctions
-and-spoke-about-his-techniques/cid/ 1894217
710 “The above information is for training purposes only and will not be used for any
commercial gains

O
r a
; ?5
iW
¢ You are physically fit Le
+ You like to have clear instructions to follow a i
« You pay attention to details while working
Diploma: Course fee ranges from INR 20,000 -
1,00,000*
Undergraduate: Course fee ranges from INR
50,000 to 2,50,000 per year.
Postgraduate: Course fee ranges from INR
1,00,000 to 5,00,000 per year.
“(The above mentioned figures are approximate numbers.
This will vary from Institute to Institute)
Certificate
Eligibility: High school diploma or equivalent.
Duration: Typically 6 months to 1 year.
Examples: Certificate in Heavy Equipment Operation,
Bulldozer Operator Certification
Diploma
Eligibility: High school diploma or equivalent.
Duration: Typically 1 to 2 years.
Examples: Diploma in Construction Equipment Technology,
Diploma in Heavy Equipment Operations
Undergraduate
Eligibility: High school diploma or equivalent, with relevant
experience in construction or machinery operation.
Duration: Typically 3 to 4 years.
Examples: Bachelor's in Construction Management,
Bachelor’s in Civil Engineering.
Postgraduate
Eligibility: Bachelor's degree in a related field.
Duration: Typically 1 to 2 years.
Examples: Master's in Construction Engineering, Master’s in
Project Management
Doctoral
Eligibility: Master's degree in a related field.
Duration: Typically 3 to 5 years.
Examples: PhD in Civil Engineering, PhD in Construction
Management
Short-Term Courses: Heavy Equipment Operator Safety
Training, Bulldozer Operating Skills Course, Advanced
Construction Machinery Training
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
‘These figures are taken from NCS and are indicative
and subject to change.
The approx. salary of a Bulldozer Operator
ranges between INR 15,000 - 35,000*
per month.
Source - https://bit.ly/3XWDbOw 711

Bulldozer operator — Supervisor >
Construction Superintendent

The course is offered by the different Departments.

This list of institutes is indicative only.

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

]. Industrial Training Institute (ITIs)

2. Bharat Technical Institute, Jamshedpur, Jharkhand

3. Krishna Technical Training Centre, Dhanbad, Jharkhand
Arvind Gaud, unsure of what to do as a career,
was fascinated with heavy vehicles. After doing
some research he came to know about the institute
NSTI, which is in mining hub in Dhanbad. After some
guidance, he came to know of the different types

@ of vehicle training. He opted for the career of a
heavy vehicle operator and is currently employed
t \ at a company in Hyderabad.”
Source - https://www.nstti.com/placement
a -html
*The above information is for training purposes only and will
a not be used for any commercial gains
“@ hr
oe ,
dein
4 e
di ; Cy
a wW

e
ao ee ry
a
e e e
a aw
« You are physically fit
¢ You are comfortable communicating with others Diploma: Course fee ranges from
¢ You pay attention to details while working INR 25,000 - 1,00,000*
Undergraduate: Course fee ranges from
INR 50,000 - 2,50,000* per year.
Postgraduate: Course fee ranges from
INR 1,00,000 - 5,00,000* per year.
“(The above mentioned figures are approximate numbers.
This will vary from Institute to Institute)
Certificate
Eligibility: Basic understanding of logistics or supply chain
management is helpful.
Duration: 6 months to 1 year.
Examples: Certificate in Cold Chain Management, Certificate in
Logistics and Supply Chain Management.
Diploma
Eligibility: High school diploma or equivalent.
Duration: Typically 1 to 2 years.
Examples: Diploma in Cold Chain Management, Diploma in
Logistics and Supply Chain Management.
Undergraduate
Eligibility: High school diploma or equivalent (subjects in
mathematics, business, or science).
Duration: Typically 3 to 4 years.
Examples: Bachelor's in Logistics and Supply Chain Management,
Bachelor's in Industrial Engineering.
Postgraduate
Eligibility: Bachelor's degree in a related field.
Duration: 1 to 2 years.
Examples: Master’s in Supply Chain Management, Master’s in
Logistics and Cold Chain Management.
Doctoral
Eligibility: Master’s degree in a related field.
Duration: 3 to 5 years.
Examples: PhD in Supply Chain and Logistics, PhD in Cold Chain
Process Management.
Short-Term Courses: Cold Chain Management Training,
Temperature-Controlled Logistics Course, Advanced Cold Chain
Logistics Course.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
‘These figures are taken from NCS and are indicative
and subject to change.
The approx. salary of a Cold Chain Process
Management Specialist (or supply chain
management specialist) ranges between
INR 25,000 - 47,200* per month.
Source - https;//www.ambitionbox.com/
profile/supply-chain-specialist-salary
713

Cold Chain Process Management
Specialist — General Manager

The course is offered by the different Departments.

This list of institutes is indicative only.

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. National Institute & Indusrital Engineering (NITIE)

2. Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh

3. Symbiosis Center for Distance Learning (SCDL), Pune, Maharashtra

4. Indian Institute of Logistics, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

5. Institute of Supply Chain Managment (ISCM), Mumbai, Maharashtra
Ravikant Sahu is the vaccine and cold chain

os = manager of Balod district in Chhattisgarh.
| Following the outbreak of the coronavirus
pandemic, he along with his colleague, the district
vaccine store manager, ensured a systematic tally
of vaccine stocks at their centre, which sent out
over 35,000 doses of vaccines each month to 29
cold chain points.”
Source - undp.org/india/building-home-
vaccines-chhattisgarh
~ “The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains
714

|
A Commercial Driver is trained and certified to drive a fi | =>
commercial vehicle professionally. They possess commercial
driver's licence and operate large and heavy vehicles,
including trucks, buses, and trailers.
i m= ge re) 0
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there ER EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
are Central Government schemes offered by Cees
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and Certificate .
Gist Serene” Eligibility: Basic literacy and knowledge of traffic rules and
safety are helpful.
e Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) Duration: 3 to 6 months.
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/ Examples: Certificate in Commercial Vehicle Driving,
is a government initiative providing skill training Certificate in Heavy Vehicle Operation.
and certification in various sectors, with financial Diploma ;
support based on course type. Eligibility: High school diploma or equivalent.
Duration: 1 to 2 years.
¢ National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme Examples: Diploma in Commercial Vehicle Driving, Diploma
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ in Road Safety and Transport Management.
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain Undergraduate
on-the-job training at approved organizations in Eligibility: High school diploma or equivalent.
the aviation and logistics sector. Duration: 3 to 4 years.
» AICTE- Vist https//urww.aicte-india.org/ bromples: Bachelor n Logins ond Supply Chain,
offers scholarships and fellowships to students Postgraduate
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These Eligibility: Bachelor’s degree in a related field.
financial aids support technical and management Duration: 1 to 2 years.
courses. Examples: Master's in Transport and Logistics Management,
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes posters in Supply Chain Management.
SesOe On ines Eligibility: Master’s degree in a related field.
"(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Duration: 3 to 5 years.
time to time) Examples: PhD in Transportation Engineering, PhD in
Logistics and Supply Chain.
Short-Term Courses: Commercial Vehicle Driving Course,
Advanced Driver Training Program, Heavy Vehicle
Operation and Safety Course.
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of eo;
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
+ Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
- All banks give education loans. _
pacers 715

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
seseceesevseseesessestssensceessenssesseseeanaees EXPECTED GROWTH PATH yw

Places of Work: Logistics Companies or any

company that needs to get either raw material or Assistant Driver/Helper + Commercial

finished products from one point to another. Vehicle Driver Level 3 — Commercial
Vehicle Driver Level 4 — Commercial

Entrepreneurship: You can own a truck and take up : :

Vehicle Driver Trainer

contractual work or start your own company.

Work Environment: You will spend a lot of time

driving the vehicle. There are no defined work hours,

but you are likely to soend 40 or more hours a week

on the road to ensure timely delivery. You must know

the fundamentals of the mechanical aspects of the

vehicle. This is because some of the maintenance

jobs have to be completed by you.

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Management.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
«<>
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES J (*4
PN

1. Intstitute of Driving & Traffic Research, New Delhi A A

2. Automotive Research Association, Pune, Maharashtra = 7

3. Central Institute of Road Transport, Pune, Maharashtra | \

Ih

PRIVATE INSTITUTES =) © © ©

1. Maruti Suzuki Driving School, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh

2. Tata Motors Skill Training Centres, Mumbai,

Maharoshtre EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD EJ
3. Honda Safety Driving Education Center, Yogita Raghuvanshi is India’s first women truck
Mluataet. Mlehereshrae driver who joined the profession in 2000 after her
. _ . husband passed away. She has a Bachelor's in Law

Ge Binvellivel Phvtine) cenetel) Nosy Bele and owns the Rajhans Transport Company today.

5. Driver Training Institute, Burari, New Delhi She is proficient in Hindi, English, Gujarati, Marathi,

6. Heavy Driving School, Patna, Bihar and Telugu.”

7. Prime Motor Driving Training School, New Delhi Source: https;//www.businessinsider.in/-

8. Truck Driving School, Kurmidih, Jharkhand meet-the-most-qualified-indian-truck-driver-
whos-also-a-mother-of-two/articleshow/
52447084.cms
“The above information is for training purposes only and will not
be used for any commercial gains

716

<, = r
ay: i Ss &: ED
| wm “SS
: . 4
A)
> >
r = cy Z LZ
. <a ab
‘*. SE @
De 2S of
9S @
e @
« You have mechanical aptitude Sat
« You have problem-solving skills
« You pay attention to details while working
Diploma: Course fee ranges from
INR 20,000 - 80,000*
Undergraduate: Course fee ranges from
INR 50,000 - 2,00,000* per year.
Postgraduate: Course fee ranges from
INR 1,00,000 - 3,00,000* per year.
“(The above mentioned figures are approximate numbers.
This will vary from Institute to Institute)
Certificate
Eligibility: No formal education required, basic understanding
of machinery and mechanics. Duration: 3 to 6 months.
Examples: Certificate in Conveyor System Maintenance,
Certificate in Industrial Automation.
Diploma
Eligibility: High school diploma or equivalent (mechanics or
electrical engineering).
Duration: 1 to 2 years.
Examples: Diploma in Mechanical Engineering, Diploma in
Industrial Maintenance.
Undergraduate
Eligibility: High school diploma or equivalent (with physics,
mathematics, or engineering).
Duration: 3 to 4 years.
Examples: Bachelor’s in Mechanical Engineering, Bachelor’s in
Automation and Robotics.
Postgraduate
Eligibility: Bachelor's degree in a related field.
Duration: 1 to 2 years.
Examples: Master’s in Mechanical Engineering, Master’s in
Industrial Engineering.
Doctoral
Eligibility: Master's degree in a related field.
Duration: 3 to 5 years.
Examples: PhD in Mechanical Engineering, PhD in Industrial
Engineering.
Short-Term Courses: Conveyor Belt Maintenance and
Troubleshooting, Industrial Automation and Conveyor Systems,
Advanced Conveyor Maintenance Training.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
‘These figures are taken from NCS and are indicative
and subject to change.
The approx. salary of a Conveyor Operation
and maintenance technician ranges between
INR 15,830 - 22,150* per month.
Source - https://bit.ly/3|IPIGKF
717

Helper — Conveyor Operator — Belt
Conveyor Maintenance — Supervisor
The course is offered by the different Departments.
This list of institutes is indicative only.
INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharshtra
2. Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi
3. Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur, West Bengal
4. National Institute of Technology Trichy, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu
5. Vellore Institute of Technology, Vellore, Tamil Nadu
6. Birla Institute of Technology and Science Pilani, Pilani, Rajasthan
7. Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai, Maharshtra
8. PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
e@°@
Leslie David spent 23 years in logistics
management and specialises in conveyor belting
ee for over 15 years. He is one of the most published
I authors on conveyor belt technology in the world.”
ee) 9 Source - dunlopcb.com/app/uploads/2020/
_ 02/Tightening-the-belt.-World-Cement.-FEB-2020.
(/ ¥ “The above information is for training purposes only and will
L_ —— not be used for any commercial gains
-@i .° 2

Distribution Manager will determine when, where and how a product is
distributed. They use information systems and software to forecast
distribution chains, and work on designing an effective program ~~ a
implementation. Dé
‘
wt PU
ear pees Y
PERSONALITY TRAITS w. Goe0seS an *
ke 4
« You like to keep your things organised of Je. 9
« You pay attention to details while working LEE ee,
« You are comfortable communicating with others Se -)
- You like to lead on is
, @ o
SCHOLARSHIPS . SS
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit ©
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes.” Fees | COURSE FEE
e Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) —&Y The approx. course fee ranges between
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/ GF INR 1,71,000 - 16,00,000*
is A government initiative providing skill training ;
and certification in various sectors, with financial These figures are estimated numbers and
support based on course type. will vary from Institute to Institute.
e National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain =
on-the-job training at approved organizations in ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
the aviation and logistics sector. ;
e AICTE- Visit https://www.aicte-india.org/ commerce) 10+2 in any stream (preferably
offers scholarships and fellowships to students 7c lete Bachelor's d BBA/BBM) j
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These - Complete Bachelor's degree (BBA/BBM) in
financial aids support technical and management Business Administration/business management
courses. OR . .
* Scholarships are also available in the institutes eet eee rs degree and rlow it up with
based on merit.” aster's ( ) in the same discipline
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
time to time)
LOANS
a |G) EXPECTED INCOME }
° Vidya Lakshmi, www. vidyalakshmi.co.in, Isa . 1 ‘These figures are indicative & subject to change. H
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of ' The approx. salary of a Distribution Manager —!
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of | ranges between INR 21,000 - 1,67,000°
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks er month ‘ nm!
Association (IBA). ;  P
- Some states have student credit cards with low b Sopyzevse https://www.ambitionbox.com/pro-
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, file/distribution-manager-salary
Bihar, etc. Poe tt
« All banks give education loans. a
S ra rnararen

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: Production units, Private and Public EXPECTED GROWTH PATH f~7
production companies, E-commerce companies,
Courier companies, Cottage based industries, Shipping Stores Distributor Process Supervisor >
companies, Military and so on. Warehouse Supervisor — Distribution
Manager

Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system Is
applicable.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of
Management.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Deen Dayal Upadhyaya College, New Delhi
2. University of Jammu, Jammu and Kashmir
3. Maharaja Sayajirao University Baroda,

Vadodara, Gujarat
4. University of Petroleum and Energy Studies,

Dehradun,Uttarakhand
5. Indian Institute of Management, Rohtak,Haryana
6. Doon University, Dehradun,Uttarakhand
7. Department of Management Sciences, Savitribai Phule

Pune University, Pune, Maharshtra
8. Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management,

Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh

EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J

PRIVATE INSTITUTES Alka Luthra has been working as a Global
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and Manager, Segment (Oral Care) & Manager,
accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying) Distribution (North America ) at Lubrizol for 9 years.
1. Raisoni Group of Institutions, Nagpur, Maharashtra She has an M.Pharm. in Pharmaceutics after which
2. Sunrise University, Alwar, Rajasthan she completed a Diploma in Marketing
3. Army Institute of Management and Technology, Management from SVKM's Narsee Monjee Institute

Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh of Management Studies (NMIMS). Lubrizol is part of
4. Sharanabasava University, Gulbarga, Karnataka the Chemicals & Related Products industry, and
5. Arcade Business College, Patna, Bihar located in Ohio, United States.”
6. Oxbridge Business School, Bangalore, Karnatka
7. Jyoti Nivas College, Bangalore, Karnatka Source: https;///www.zoominto.com/p/Alka-Luthra/
8. National Institute of Business Excellence, 2069236482

Bangalore, Karnatka

“The above information is for training purposes only and
Information on Institute rankings is available at - will not be used for any commercial gains
https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU), New
Delhi
720

Food and Beverage Manager is responsible for providing food and q
drinks to the guests at a hotel or restaurant. He or she also, sometimes,
organizes, directs, controls and evaluates the operations of a
hospitality business.
we =
PERSONALITY TRAITS WY.
+ You like to lead
+ You pay attention to details |
« You can comfortably talk to everyone ==
« You are quick to take on new responsibilities res |] COURSE FEE
* Knowledge on food and beverage | —Y The approx. course fee ranges between
% INR 1,00,000 - 4,00,000"
‘These figures are estimated numbers and
SCHOLARSHIPS will vary from Institute to Institute.
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and © vevrrererreereeeeereeersenees
SIGNS SENSES. 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream.
0 Pradhan Manitri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (BBA) in
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/ Hospitality, Travel and Tourism and follow it up
is a government initiative providing skill training with a Master's in the same field
and certification in various sectors, with financial OR .
support read cous type. . Complete a Bachelor's in Hotel Management and
+ National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme Catering Technology/ Catering Science and Hotel
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ Management/ Hospitality and Hotel
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain Administration or any related field
on-the-job training at approved organizations in OR y ,
the aviation and logistics sector. 1:
. — Complete a Bachelor’s in Hotel Management and
+ AICTE- Visit https://www.aicte-india.org/ Catering Technology/ Catering Science and Hotel
offers scholarships and fellowships to students Management/ Hospitality and Hotel
enieliee! Ines CAULex] 2) te sel US ules 33 Administration or any related field, followed by a
financial aids support technical and management M 's in th lated field
ROUIEES. on in the same or related field.
¢ Scholarships are also available in the institutes Pursue Diploma in Hotel Management
based on merit.” ,
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
time to time)
LOANS |
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a | @_7p EXPECTED INCOME |
Hl ar awn fhe . ‘These figures are indicative and subject to change. 1
portal for students seeking education loan. This |
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of | The approx. salary of a Food and Beverage |
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks | Manager ranges between INR 13,000 — !
Association (IBA). | 1,67,000* or more per month.
+ Some states have student credit cards with low | ,
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Source: https://www.payscale.com/re-
Bihar, etc. | ee oem aia
¢ All banks give education loans. | iiewaycrellely _

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Upscale hotels and resorts, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
restaurants, cruises, casino, bars and pubs and airlines ;
among others. Trainee — Banquet Waiter — Banquet Cap-
tain — Assistant Banquet Manager — Ban-
Work Environment: You must be physically fit as you will quet Manager — Assistant Food and Bever-
need to exert yourself. You will handle a team of cooks age Manager — Food and
and servers. Local travel is not a part of this job profile. Beverage Manaaer
You are likely to work 5 to 6 days a week 10 to 12 hours 9 9
every day. You are likely to work longer hours during OR
peak seasons. Bartender — Bar Manager — Assistant
Food and Beverage Manager — Food and
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field. Beverage Manager/Director
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Hotel Management Institutes.
This list of institutes is indicative only f )
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES y 2
1. Institute of Hotel Management,Goa
2. Institute of Hotel Management, New Delhi
3. Institute of Hotel Management, Mumbai, Maharashtra "
4. Institute of Hotel Management, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Institute of Hotel Management, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
6. Institute of Hotel Management, Thiruvananthapuram,Kerala
7. Institute of Hotel Management, Hyderabad,Telangana
8. Institute of Hotel Management, Bangalore,Karnataka
9. Institute of Hotel Management, Aurangabad,Maharashtra
PRIVATE INSTITUTES Ke
(Please check if the Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying)
1. Welcome Graduate School of Hotel Administration, Karnataka EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
2. Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka Shahnaaz Anjum works as Food and
3. Guru Nanak Institute ° Hotel Management, Beverage Manager at The Leela Bhartiya City,
Salica a i, h Bengaluru. She has been in the industry for 13
_ ot idyapeet eemed University, Pune,Maharast tra years. Beginning her career with The Westin
. Oberoi Center of Learning and Devilopment, New Delhi Hyderabad, she went on to work for Sheraton
. oo. . Grand Bangalore, JW Marriott Bengaluru,
Information on the institute rankings can be found at Westin and Le Meridian Bahrain, Courtyard by
~ htips://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking. html Marriott Kochi, and The Leela Palace Chennai.”
DISTANCE LEARNING Ue . Source: hitos;//bwhotelier.businessworld.in/ar-
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) ticle/The-Leela-Bhartiya-City-
Bengaluru-elevates-two-core-personnel
/ 09-06-2022-432038/
‘The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains
722

rs a
alt _
« You like to be well groomed at all times
« You have good communication skills
« You are able to handle difficult situations P
. Diploma: Course fee ranges from
e You are physically strong INR 20,000 _ 70,000*.
Undergraduate: Course fee ranges from
INR 50,000 - 1,50,000* per year.
Postgraduate: Course fee ranges from
INR 1,00,000 - 3,00,000* per year.
“(The above mentioned figures are approximate numbers.
This will vary from Institute to Institute)
Certificate
Eligibility: No formal education required.
Duration: 3 to 6 months.
Examples: Certificate in Front Office Operations,
Certificate in Hotel Management
Diploma
Eligibility: High school diploma or equivalent.
Duration: 1 to 2 years.
Examples: Diploma in Hotel Management, Diploma in
Front Office Management.
Undergraduate
Eligibility: High school diploma or equivalent.
Duration: 3 to 4 years.
Examples: Bachelor's in Hotel Management, Bachelor's in
Front Office Management.
Postgraduate
Eligibility: Bachelor's degree in a related field.
Duration: 1 to 2 years.
Examples: Master's in Hotel Management, Master’s in
Tourism and Hospitality, Master's in Hospitality
Management
Doctoral
Eligibility: Master’s degree in a related field.
Duration: 3 to 5 years.
Examples: PhD in Hotel Management, PhD in Hospitality
Management
Short-Term Courses: Front Office Management Training,
Hotel Receptionist Training, Hospitality and Guest Service
Management
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
‘These figures are taken from NCS and are indicative
and subject to change.
The approx. salary for a Front Office
Associate is Ranges between
INR 12,500 - 25,000 per month.
Source - hitps;//bit.ly/3Z5hmxu
723

Front Office Associate —> Front Office
Incharge — Administration Supervisor —
Customer Service Manager
This course is offered by the Hotel Management f a »y
Institutes.
This list of institutes Is indicative only \ | ~.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Institute of Hotel Management, across diffrent centers of India
2. Bundelkhand University, Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh
3. Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, Srinagar,
Uttrakhand ae
4. Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, Haryana
PRIVATE INSTITUTES .
(Please check if the Institute is affiliated and accredited A 19-year old Velluri Rashmi is the youngest
with UGC before applying) daughter of her parents, who resides in
1. Welcome Graduate School of Hotel Administration, Sabbavaram (Andhra Pradesh). Her Father is a
Manipal, Karnataka daily wage labourer and Mother does some odd
2. Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, jobs. Rashmi realised that she has to help her family
Karnataka and after class XIl she stopped her studies and
3. Guru Nanak Institute of Hotel Management, started looking for a job. It was then she heard
Kolkata, West Bengal about the skills training opportunities being offered
4. Bharati Vidyapeeth Deemed University, Pune, by Don Bosco Tech and approached the centre.
Maharashtra After counselling process she opted for the
5. Oberoi Center of Learning and Deviopment, New Delhi Hospitality domain. After completion of training
during the campus interview she was selected as a
Information on the institute rankings can be Front Office Executive for Hotel V located in
found at - https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.htm! Visakhapatnam. She was offered a salary of
Rs.1 1,000 per month and free food and
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE accommodation. Rashmi quickly took the job and
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) soon settled down to support her family.”
Source - hitps;//www.dbtech.in/SuccessStory
.aspx?StoryID=H/x9iIPSWToCOEFHMTnRDD8QcA
KbZCRe98av0ONDCmckl=
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains
724
I

Logistics Analyst, is responsible for the entire production life of a product/service right from the purchasing of
materials to the distribution of goods. Logistics analysts analyse a company’s assets in order to achieve its overall
mission and goals. x Bo0K
x
* *
PERSONALITY TRAITS w. Q @
* Q
« You are comfortable in communicating with others
« You like to analyse problems/situations g « #
« You pay attention to details while working } @) in
Jt
Aa J
q
A
SCHOLARSHIPS ~~
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and rees | COURSE FEE
state Schemes. Wy The approx. course fee ranges between
¢ Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) INR 11,000 - 30,00,000°
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/ ;
is a government initiative providing skill training “These figures are estimated numbers and
and certification in various sectors, with financial will vary from Institute to Institute.
support based on course type.
e National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ =
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
on-the-job training at approved organizations in oe
the aviation and logistics sector. 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream (preferably
e AICTE- Visit https://www.aicte-india.org/ commerce).
offers scholarships and fellowships to students 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (BBA/BBM) in
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These Business Administration/ Business Management or
financial aids support technical and management Economics.
courses. OR
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes Complete Bachelor's degree and follow it up with
based on merit.” Master's degree in Supply Chain Management.
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from
time to time)
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
LOANS ee
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This | EXPECTED INCOME
portal has been developed under the guidance of Lo") “The figures are indicative & subject to change.
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks | The approx. salary of a Logistics Analyst
Association (IBA). | ranges between INR 18,000 - 83,000*
+ Some states have student credit cards with low | per month
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, !
Bihar, etc. | Source: https;//www.ambitionbox.com/pro-
- All banks give education loans. | file/logistics-analyst-salary an
@ ono en anc ancenaccaccnecannncencaaccenacscascnac| A

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: Production units, Private and Public EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
production companies, E-commerce companies,
Courier companies, Small and big industries, Cottage Frontline Analyst/Supervisor —
based industries, Shipping companies, Armed forces. Operations/Supply Chain Manager — Chief
Supply Chain Manager or Logistics Director
Work Environment: You can work anywhere from a
factory setting to an office to a mobile location like a
delivery or pickup center. Depending on the role, you
may also be regularly required to travel to visit different
facilities within a supply chain. You are expected to
work 8 to 9 hours for 5 to 6 days a week.
Entrepreneurship: You can start your own business or
firm.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Management.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Shaheed Sukhdev College of Business Studies, New Delhi
2. Indian Institute of Management, Rohtak, Haryana
3. MSU Baroda, Vadodara,Gujarat
4. University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, Dehradun,
Uttarakhand
5. Indian Institute of Management, Rohtak,Haryana
6. Doon University, Dehradun, Uttarakhand
7. University of Mysuru, Mysuru, Karnataka
8. Indian Institute of Social Welfare and Business
Management, Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66 |
accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying) . . ;
1. Raisoni Group of Institutions, Nagpur, Maharashtra oily bJonuel, @ sSeAGisd logistics prReesstonel
2. SunRise University, Alwar, Rajasthan with over 23 years of experience, is the Director of
3. CMJ University Jorabat Meghalaya EKF Global Logistics, a family-owned business
A. Sharnbasva University Gulbarga Karnataka formerly known as Express Kargo Forwarders Private
5. Arcade Business College Patna ‘Bihar Limited. A third-generation Customs Broker and
6. Oxbridge Business School, Bengaluru, Karnataka Sosene g Sueeien Froth Fotenehelss, ane [elles
7. Jyoti Nivas College, Bengaluru, Karnataka 2Gem, Gegrao i Wene! ene Melisa oD AR.
8. National Institute of Business Excellence, College of Commerce and Economics, Mumbai.
Bengaluru,Karnataka .
Source:https;//www.curafluence.com/chaitaly-meh
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE ic7
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU), “The above information is for training purposes only and
New Delhi will not be used for any commercial gains
726

Logistics Manager is responsible for coordinating storage, transportation, and delivery of finished goods. They
oversee and work with partners and colleagues such as Transport Managers to ensure stock is maintained and
moves efficiently.
Bar Y
PERSONALITY TRAITS wx. 2
+ You like to keep your things organised ; ff
« You pay attention to details while working OOO ye
+ You are comfortable communicating with others :
+ You like to lead
_— S|
SCHOLARSHIPS
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit b
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there a
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes.”
¢ Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) Fees | COURSE FEE
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/ —
is A government initiative providing skill training Y The approx. course fee ranges between
and certification in various sectors, with financial INR 1,71,000 - 16,00,000
support based on course type. ‘These figures are estimated numbers and
¢ National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme will vary from Institute to Institute.
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain
on-the-job training at approved organizations in
the aviation and logistics sector. Ez EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
¢ AICTE- Visit https://www.aicte-india.org/ ee
offers scholarships and fellowships to students 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream (preferably
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These commerce).
financial aids support technical and management 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (BBA/BBM) in
COUISES. Business Administration/business management.
- Scholarships are also available in the institutes OR
based on merit.” Complete Bachelor’s degree and follow it up with
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Master's (MBA) in the same discipline.
time to time)
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
LOANS
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This Ga EXPECTED INCOME ociianee
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of | The approx. salary of a Loaisties Manaaer
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks ws : NR 18 334 - 67 000"
Association (IBA). | Fanges ee (ON OEY
. . ' per month.
« Some states have student credit cards with low
Shay a ae deningienes, Wes! Bemgel, Oclsre} | Source: https;//www.ambitionbox.com/pro- |
~~ | file/logistics-manager-salary
+ All banks give education loans. _
Ba Sling

WHERE WILL YOU WORK

Places of Work: Production units, Private and Public EXPECTED GROWTH PATH fi

production companies, E-commerce companies,

Courier companies, Cottage based industries, Shipping Trainee, Storage and Warehousing —

companies, Military and so on. Executive, Storage and Warehousing —

Work Envi «Th kimi wyoically 54 Assistant General Manager,Storage and
ork Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to F Rav

6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is Warehousing ~» Logistics Manager

applicable.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

The course is offered by the Department of Management.

This list of Institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Deen Dayal Upadhyaya College, New Delhi

2. University of Jammu, Jammu, Jammu and Kashmir

3. Maharaja Sayaqjirao University Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat

4. University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, Dehradun,Uttarakhand

5. Indian Institute of Management, Rohtak,Haryana

6. Doon University, Dehradun, Uttarakhand

7. Department of Management Sciences, Savitribai Phule Pune University,

Pune , Maharashtra
8. Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management, Gwalior,
Madhya Pradesh

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if Institute is affiliated and

accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)

1. Raisoni Group of Institutions, Nagpur, Maharashtra EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66

2. Sunrise University, Alwar, Rajasthan

3. Army Institute of Management and Technology, Kruti Jobanputra, the Director at JWC Logistics Park

Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh Private Limited and JWR Logistics Private Limited,

4. Sharanabasava University, Gulbarga, Karnataka has organised and implemented complex

5. Arcade Business College, Patna, Bihar operations, which have helped the company meet

6. Oxbridge Business School, Bengaluru, Karnataka its goals. She completed her Bachelor's of

7. Jyoti Nivas College, Bengaluru, Karnataka Management Studies and followed it up with an

8. National Institute of Business Excellence, MBA from SP Jain Institute of Management.

Bengaluru, Karnataka Jobanputra has introduced innovative systems in her
company in this area and has worked consistently in

DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE improving the gender ratio.”

Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU),

New Delhi Source: https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/mag
azines/panache/breaking-stereotypes-kruti-jobanp
utra-is-setting-an-example-for-women-in-the-field-o
f-logistics/articleshow/64568026.cms
“The above information is for training purposes only and

728 will not be used for any commercial gains

MULTI-TASKING STAFF :
Multi-tasking Staff are non-gazetted, non-ministerial Central government
employees who are posted in various ministries, departments and offices. :
The national-level SSC MTS exam is conducted to recruit candidates for
the following posts — havaldar, safaiwala, daftary, junior gestetner =
operator, peon, jamadar, chowkidar, mali. ie
Ban : ¢
PERSONALITY TRAITS «= ss WY. , |
« You like to file or type rees | COURSE FEE
¢ You would like to work in an office —&Y Diploma: Course fee ranges from
« You are good at keeping records of your work 7 INR 10,000 - 40,000"
Undergraduate: Course fee ranges from
INR 30,000 - 1,00,000" per year.
Postgraduate: Course fee ranges from
INR 50,000 - 2,00,000* per year.
SCHOLARSHIPS *(The above mentioned figures are approximate numbers.
_ This will vary from Institute to Institute)
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there =
are Central Government schemes offered by EN EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and _
State Schemes.” Certificate
Eligibility: No formal education required.
¢ Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) Duration: 3 to 6 months.
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/ Examples: Certificate in Office Administration,
is A government initiative providing skill training Certificate in Customer Service and Hospitality
and certification in various sectors, with financial Diploma
support based on course type. Eligibility: High school diploma or equivalent.
, F F , Duration: 1 to 2 years.
* National Sppionuce snip ieunettels SENG UL Examples: Diploma in Office Management, Diploma in
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ Business Administration.
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain Undergraduate
on-the-job training at approved organizations in Eligibility: High school diploma or equivalent.
the aviation and logistics sector. Duration: 3 to 4 years.
¢ AICTE- Visit https://www.caicte-india.org/ Examples: Bachelor's in Business Administration,
offers scholarships and fellowships to students Bachelor's in Office Management.
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These Postgraduate , .
financial aids support technical and management Eligibility: Bachelor's degree in a related field.
ABIES. Duration: 1 to 2 years.
Examples: Master’s in Business Administration, Master's
¢ Scholarships are also available in the institutes in Office and Administrative Management.
based on merit.” Doctoral
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Eligibility: Master's degree in a related field.
time to time) Duration: 3 to 5 years. we . .
Examples: PhD in Business Administration, PhD in Office
Management.
LOANS Short-Term Courses: Office Administration Skills Training,
Customer Service Excellence, Time Management for
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Office Professionals.
portal for students seeking education loan. This SSC-MTS: Qualify the SSC-MTS exam
portal has been developed under the guidance of Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of a
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). 21S INCOME
| e figures are indicative & subject to change. |
» Some states have student credit cards with low ;
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, The approx. salary of a Multi-Tasking Staff
Bihar, etc. ! ranges between INR 18,000 - 56,900° !
. . ' per month.
All banks give education loans. | Source:https;//labour.gov.in/sites/default/files/nort |, ,
h_east_regions_detailed_advertisement_udc_and_ an
1 mts_O.paf _

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: Government offices across
d t ts.
inelinin EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
Work Environment: You will be running errands for Multitasking Staff Officers — Lower Division
senior officers and hence must be prompt. You will Clerk — Assistant Upper Division Clerk >
not handle a team. Local travel is a part of the job Division Glare = Sete Gitar
profile. You are likely to work 5 to 6 days a week
and 8 to 9 hours every day.
Opportunities for differently abled exist in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
INSTITUTE
1. University of Delhi, New Delhi
2. Jamia Millia Islamia , New Delhi
3. University of Mumbai, Mumbai, Maharashtra
4. Tata Institute of Social Sciences , Mumbai, Maharashtra
y™
_= - te
af , 2 / 4 “'
| aie we, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
pl [een Gurbinder Singh works as a Multi-Tasking Staff at the
nal Sector 17 Post Office in Chandigarh. He did his
mT cael 2 . schooling from Shivalik Public School, Mohali.”
a Source:htitp;//bit.ly/40asJFF
€ =e “The above information is for training purposes only and will not be
used for any commercial gains
730

« You pay attention to details while working - =
« You are physically fit
¢ You are comfortable communicating with others
* You love nature
Diploma: Course fee ranges from
INR 20,000 — 50,000°
Undergraduate: Course fee ranges from
INR 50,000 — 2,00,000* per year.
Postgraduate: Course fee ranges from
INR 1,00,000 - 3,00,000* per year
“(The above mentioned figures are approximate numbers.
This will vary from Institute to Institute)
Certificate
Eligibility: Open to high school graduates or individuals with
a keen interest in nature.
Duration: 6 months to 1 year
Examples: Certificate in Nature Guiding/Eco-Tourism.
Diploma
Eligibility: Completed high school (10+2) or equivalent.
Duration: 1 to 2 years
Examples: Diploma in Eco-Tourism/Nature Guide.
Undergraduate
Eligibility: 10+2 or equivalent (science).
Duration: 3 to 4 years
Examples: B.Sc. in Environmental Science/ Forestry, B.A. in
Tourism Management.
Postgraduate
Eligibility: Bachelor’s degree in environmental science,
tourism, forestry, or related fields.
Duration: 2 years
Examples: M.Sc. in Environmental Science/ Wildlife
Biology, M.A. in Eco-Tourism Management.
Doctoral
Eligibility: Master’s degree (environmental science, wildlife
biology, or eco-tourism).
Duration: 3 to 5 years
Examples: PhD in Environmental Science/Wildlife
Conservation.
Short-Term Courses: Nature Guide Certification Program,
Eco-Tourism Guide Training, Wildlife Conservation Training,
Nature Interpretation and Communication Course.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
‘These figures are indicative and subject to change.
The approx. salary of a Nature Guide ranges
between INR 8,080 —- 59,400* per month.
Source - hitps://www.payscale.com/re-
search/IN/Job=Tour_Guide/Salary
731

Assistant Nature Guide — Nature Guide
This course is offered by various Institutes across different States/UTs
of India from time to time.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
]. Indian Institute of Tourism and Traval Managemet across different
States/UTs of India different centers of India
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
1. Thomas Cook Central of Learning, Mumbai, Maharashtra
2. Kuoni Academy, Andheri West, Mumbai, Maharashtra
Chris Packham (United Kingdom) is a wildlife
expert with over 30 years of experience in
. nature guiding and environmental
4 conservation. He is renowned for his wildlife
ia —7 J I documentaries and educational programs,
b: i a =“ 4 particularly focusing on bird and animal
~4a ¥ Ma t behaviour.”
a 3 ;
a | ‘oy " Source: https://www.chrispackham.co.uk/
je q Cc , = “The above information is for training purposes only
( e ) and will not be used for any commercial gains
732 )
ans
(i —

Office Administrator is a professional who oversees a range of tasks across his or her organization's office. His or
her responsibilities include supervising staff, organizing office operations and procedures, preparing payroll,
controlling correspondence, designing filing systems, reviewing and approving supply requisitions, and assigning
and monitoring clerical functions.
?
e
(399) =
» oe
@
SCHOLARSHIPS
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes.”
e Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY)
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/
is A government initiative providing skill training
and certification in various sectors, with financial
support based on course type. eB EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
e National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme A] evccesrerseerseresseerserseees
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain 2 C P te Diol : H ; Of
on-the-job training at approved organizations in “omplere bipioma in tron ce
the aviation and logistics sector. Monocement/stel Mane Operations/ Hotel
_ . . —— anagement/Hotel Management atering
8) AICTE] Visit https;//unsnw.aicte indic.ord/, Technology or similar courses with specialization
offers scholarships and fellowships to students in Front Office M ;
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These In Fron ce Management.
financial aids support technical and management OR -_ ;
CoUESS. Complete Bachelor sin any subject and then
¢ Scholarships are also available in the institutes rolow _ an wn o cortiheation course on ;
based on merit.” ‘eceptionist Program, Office Management or any
a ; similar subject .
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from
time to time) Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
LOANS
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a io.
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
- All banks give education loans. _
eee ee ew ow ow | F399

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Hospitals, Universities, Financial EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
Institutions, Government Agencies, Charities, Small
Businesses, Retailers, Manufacturers, Major Companies, Office Administrator — Executive
Sitel Meet Fitts eliraiig) chisis Assistant > Senior Executive Assistant
Work Environment: You will be working in an office set up. OR 7"
You are likely to handle a team. Local travel is not a part Office Administrator — Operations
of the job profile. You are likely to work 6 days a week Manager — Director of Operations
and 8 to 9 hours every day. You may have to work
weekends and longer hours if the situation demands.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
corr
This course is offered by the Department of Business Management ~
This list of institutes in indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Management, Indore, Madhya Pradesh fe oI
2. Indian Institute of Management, Ranchi, Jharkhand > d
3. Indian Institute of Management, Rohtak, Haryana a
A. Jamia Millia Islamia University, New Delhi Sf
5. Shaheed Sukhdev College of Business Studies, New Delhi
6. Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel
Management, Noida, Uttar Pradesh
7. Delhi Technological University, New Delhi
8. University of Lucknow, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES permed
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying)
1. Shri Vile Parle Kelavni Mandal, Narsee Monjee Institute of Management Studies,
Mumbai, Maharashtra
2. Woxsen University, Hyderabad, Telangana
3. Institute of Chartered Financial Analysts of India, EXAMPLE FROM THE Fie_D Oy
i igher Educati .
Foundation for Higher Education, Hyderabad, Telangana Adwiedy Visca eureily wets wih dhe
4. KIIT School of Management, Bhubaneswar, Odisha . : : :
wor 5 National Institute of Agricultural Marketing
5. Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat . . . oo.
, Bert (NIAM) as a business executive. Prior to joining
6. Institute of Management, Nirma University, Ahmedabad, . .
Gujarat NIAM, Vyas worked as a office manager with
. «ne . Shah Technical Consultants Pvt Ltd. He has
7. JK Lakshmipat University, Jaipur, Rajasthan : .
; 5 ; done his BBA from Commerce College Jaipur
8. Amity Global Business School, Noida, Uttar Pradesh ; :
and MBA in rural management from the Indian
Institute of Rural Management, Jaipur.”
Information on the institute rankings can be found . . .
. . op
at - hitp;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking html Source: https://ccsniam.gov.in/team?id=1 18
“The above information is for training purposes only
and will not be used for any commercial gains
734

Operations Manager is responsible for creating the highest level of @; 7 a
efficiency within an organisation. Operations department handles
strategic issues like how to acquire raw material, how much to 7 |
produce at what cost while maintaining quality control. One can work _/ ~ =
in operations and Supply Chain Management (OSCM) which involves / ~~ _ ~
management of inventory through the supply chain and operations ! »
Managers who coordinate and develop new processes while | TS
re-evaluating current structures. a J
Bar
PERSONALITY TRAITS Ww.
« You are good at organizing and coordinating
« You like to pay attention to details
You are like to analyze things
« You enjoy solving problems
| FEES | COURSE FEE
—%> The approx. course fee ranges between
SCHOLARSHIPS P ine 20,000 - 2,00,000°
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit . ; ;
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there USS ieIaRe TE Si renee TS Che
will vary from Institute to Institute.
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes.”
¢ Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) ES EDUCATIONAL P ATHWAY
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/
is a government initiative providing skill training 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream.
and certification in various sectors, with financial 2. Complete Bachelor's degree with specialisation
support based on course type. in Operations.
e National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme OR
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ Complete Bachelor's degree, followed by Master's
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain in Operations/M.B.A. for professional growth and
on-the-job training at approved organizations in specialisations.
the aviation and logistics sector. OR
e AICTE- Visit https://www.aicte-india.org/ Complete Bachelor's degree with specialisation in
offers scholarships and fellowships to students Operations and then pursue a Certification/
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These Diploma course which can be pursued online
financial aids support technical and management alongside work.
courses.
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes For admissions for Bachelor's degree, you must
based on merit. qualify in one of these entrance examinations: CET,
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from SET, DU JAT, SET etc. and for Post graduate
time to time) degree, you must qualify in any of the following
exams: CAT/ XAT/ GMAT/ SNAP/ NMAT/ CMAT.
LOANS Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a a
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of Ga EXPECTED INCOME |
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of “The figures are indicative & subject to change.
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks .
Association (IBA). The Bui ee ee
- Some states have student credit cards with low ;  fanges berween ’ oe per
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha nett
Bihar, eto. , 1 1 ' | pena eee aia A |
« All banks give education loans. ‘ony =General_%2F_Qperations_Manager/- z=

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of work: Financial institutions, Hospitality, IT
firms, News and media houses, MNCs, Corporate EXPECTED GROWTH PATH fi?
houses, E-commerce companies, Hospitals, and retail
stores. Operations Coordinator — Operations
Supervisor — Operations Manager >
Work Environment: You will work in a dynamic Operations Controller + Operations Director
environment. It is important to make decisions promptly
and adapt to changing circumstances. You will work in
an office setup with support staff. It is usual to work
long hours and on weekends.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Management or Commerce.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Madras Christian College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Lala Lajpat Rai College of Commerce and Economics, Mumbai, Maharashtra
3. Shaheed Sukhdev College of Business Studies, New Delhi
4. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi
5. Sydenham College of Commerce and Economics, Mumbai, Maharashtra
6. Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune, Maharashtra
7. Jamnalal Bajaj Institute of Management Studies, Mumbai, Maharashtra
8. Indian Institute of Management, (Located in various States/UTs)
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying)
1. Christ University, Bengaluru, Karnataka
2. Amity International Business School, Noida, Uttar Pradesh
2) NII 1S Bsa a Uhricaro Muncie Melee EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
ae nite Eanmer Benigallite Setitetele) Priya Balasubramaniam is an experienced technology
5. Institute of Management Studies, Noida, Uttar Pradesh executive with nearly 20 years serving in a range of
° on eer cena Tami Nadu senior procurement and operations roles at Apple.
. yamshedpur, Snarkcnan Currently, she oversees all core technologies operations
inf . moana Ki be found and iPhone operations for the company. She is
, ormation olny * ee 9093 Ray ki e hel ELIS responsible for the iPhone manufacturing supply chain,
BEY ERI A BNC BY. //sseuLaing iti quality and repair operations, and core components.
RI CTANGHEERRINCIRSRHIUnE She previously worked as an engineer for global
: aia : . ; industrial robotics supplier ABB. She holds a Bachelor's
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU), New Delhi in Mechanical Engineering from Bangalore University
and an MBA in Supply Chain Management from
Michigan State University.”
Source:https//www.weforum.org/stories/authors/priya-balasubra
maniam/
*The above information is for training purposes only and will not be
used for any commercial gains
736

a
= — =i
| > =
« You are comfortable working in a team =
+ You like to have clear instructions to follow po i =
« You pay attention to details while working
Diploma: Course fee ranges from
INR 15,000 - 60,000*
Undergraduate: Course fee ranges from
INR 50,000 — 1,50,000* per year.
Postgraduate: Course fee ranges from
INR 1,00,000 - 3,00,000* per year.
“(The above mentioned figures are approximate numbers.
This will vary from Institute to Institute)
Certificate
Eligibility: High school graduates or individuals with an
interest in textile operations.
Duration: 6 months to 1 year
Examples: Certificate in Textile Dyeing/Packaging Dyeing
Operations.
Diploma
Eligibility: Completed high school (10+2) or equivalent.
Duration: 1 to 2 years
Examples: Diploma in Textile Technology/ Dyeing and Finishing
Undergraduate
Eligibility: 10+2 or equivalent, preferably with a background
in science.
Duration: 3 to 4 years
Examples: B.Tech in Textile Engineering, B.Sc. in Textile
Technology, B.A. in Fashion and Textile Design
Postgraduate
Eligibility: Bachelor's degree in textile engineering/fashion
design, or related fields.
Duration: 2 years
Examples: M.Tech in Textile Engineering, M.A. in Fashion and
Textile Design.
Doctoral
Eligibility: Master's degree in textile engineering, dyeing, or
related fields.
Duration: 3 to 5 years
Examples: Ph.D. in Textile Engineering, PhD in Dyeing and
Finishing.
Short-Term Courses: Textile Dyeing Technology Training,
Packaging and Textile Finishing Techniques.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
“These figures are taken from NCS and are indicative
and subject to change .
The approx. salary of a Package Dyeing
Machine Operator ranges between
INR 11,000 - 18,000* per month.
Source - https://bit.ly/3Z2n5G >

Helper — Package Dyeing Machine
Operator — Shift Supervisor
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai, Maharashtra
2. National Institute of Fashion Technology, located in various State/UTs across India
3. Synthetic & Art Silk Mills' Research Association, Mumbai, Maharashtra
4. Industrial Training Institutes, located in various State/UTs across India
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
1. The Technological Institute of Textile & Sciences, Bhiwani, Haryana
2. DKTE Society's Textile & Engineering Institute, Ichalkaranji, Maharashtra
3. Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel International School of Textiles & Management, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
4. Northern India Textile Research Association, Ghaziabad, Uttar Pradesh
» y
“KX.
th
738
LY

Port Operations Manager is responsible for the smooth running of operations on a
port terminal. He or she oversees activities varying from managing the arrival and
departure of ships, loading and unloading of numerous types of goods and cargo, om 0
storing them in warehouses to their custom clearances. ma
7 . ; = | < ‘ 4

PERSONALITY TRAITS w. ra 4 A:

» You would like to work as a manager of a company Y wa _

- You are a careful and organized person a: > <5 ~~

» You have teamwork orientation === << wd

- You love to lead |

4 - om
_ 7-0. aa w—oo
| FEES | COURSE FEE
—A The approx. course fee ranges between
SCHOLARSHIPS
_ Y INR 80,000 - 6,00,000*

e National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there These figures are estimated numbers and
are Central Government schemes offered by will vary from Institute to Institute.
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes.”

e Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) =
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/ ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
is A government initiative providing skill training
and certification in various sectors, with financial 1.Complete 10+2 in the Commerce or Science
support based on course type. stream (Physics, Chemistry and Biology).

e National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme 2.Complete Bachelor's in Science/Technology/
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ Engineering/Management or any related subject.
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain OR
on-the-job training at approved organizations in Pursue Diploma in
the aviation and logistics sector. Science/Technology/Engineering/Management or

« AICTE- Visit https://www.cicte-india.org/ any related subject.
offers scholarships and fellowships to students OR
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These Complete Bachelor's degree and pursue Post
financial aids support technical and management Graduate Diploma in Port and Shipping
COUISES. Management.

« Scholarships are also available in the institutes OR
based on merit.” Complete Bachelor's degree and pursue an MBA in

“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Shipping and Port Management.

time to time)

Please check the duration of the course during enrolment

LOANS nnn

« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This Gi EXPECTED INCOME " —
portal has been developed under the guidance of ; |
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of The approx. salary of a Shiopina and Port
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks Pprox: y Peng
Association (IBA). Manager ranges between INR 35,000 -

: ; 1 97,000* or more per month or more.

« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Source: https://www.glassdoor.co.in/Salaries/ship-
Bihar, etc. !_ ping-manager-salary-SRCH_KOO,16.htm

+ All banks give education loans. a

QD eee © © © © © © 8 © 739

WHERE WILL YOU WORK

Places of Work: Import and export firms, Public and EXPECTED GROWTH PATH f~/

Private shipping companies, Government Departments

like the Railway and Defence etc. Merchant Officer + Port Manager >

Shipping Manager — Port Director

Work Environment: It is not a desk job. You will handle

a team of officials. Local travel is not a part of the job

profile. You are likely to work 5 to 6 days a week and 8

to 9 hours every day.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

The course is offered by the Department of Management.

This list of Institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Indian Maritime University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

2. International Maritime Academy, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

3. Indian Maritime University, Kochi, Kerala

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)

1. Academy of Maritime Education and Training, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

2. Indian Institute of Logistics, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

3. Mahakaushal University, Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66

4. MIT College of Management, Pune, Maharashtra

5. Narottam Morarjee Institute of Shipping, Mumbai, Maharashtra Vettath Raghunandan Isa seasoned

6. Seacom Marine College, Howrah,West Bengal professional In ports and logistics sector,

ge, Howrah, g
. with over four decades of experience

7. Smt H. B. Palan College of Arts & Commerce, Kutch, Gujarat spanning across port operations, logistics,

8. Srinivas University, Bangaluru, Karnataka supply chain management, project

9. Subharti Institute of Management and Commerce, development and business development. He

Meerut, Gujarat is the CEO of Karaikal Port. Previously he has
10. University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, worked with Adani Ports and SEZ, Dhamra
Dehradun Uttarakhand Port, JM Baxi & Company and Indian Potash
Ltd, etc. Raghunandan has a Commercial
Shipping & Ship Management degree from
Narottam Morarjee Institute of Shipping, a
Training and Certification course in Project
Management from IIT Mumbai, and Diploma
from Bureau of Business Management,
Mumbai.”
Source:https://karaikalport.com/managem
ent-team/
“The above information is for training purposes
only and will not be used for any commercial
740 gains

SECRETARY/PERSONAL ASSISTANT gay = =—
Personal Assistant or a Secretary usually undertakes administrative, —
clerical and managerial tasks on behalf of an individual or department. —
His or her tasks may include managing schedules and correspondence
and planning travels among others. || hoa —
5 —
SCHOLARSHIPS
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes.”
e Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
is A government initiative providing skill training 1. Complete 10 +2 in any stream
and certification in various sectors, with financial 2 Complete Bachelor's degree in Office
t based on course type. .
Notion ‘Aw, ° -: . 1 m Sor Gah Management and Secretarial Practice/
e National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme S tarial Practice/C teS tarvshi
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ oo srmilon Proctice/ OTPOTANS OSETSNANYSNIP OF
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain OR lect.
on-the-job training at approved organizations in . . .
the aviation and logistics sector. mompists ' aren In Oice Services/
. a ministration/Administration Services
° AICTE- Visit hitps://www.aicte-india.org/ Secretarial Practice or any similar course.
offers scholarships and fellowships to students OR
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These , . .
financial aids support technical and management Complete Bachelor's degree in any subject and
courses. then opt for a certificate course in Office
. . . . Administration/Modern Office Management &
° Scholarships lec ele loeb the institutes Secretarial Ornotice/ Secretaria Practice and
t."
ase en men similar subject.
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from
time to time) Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
LOANS
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a eo.
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
- Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, oe
Bihar, etc. _
« All banks give education loans. sere eet ee ees
eee eee eee ee Sl

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Public and Private Sector Companies, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH Tes
Agencies and Banks across India.
Receptionist — Personal Secretary — Join
Work Environment: It is a desk job. You will not handle a other occupation
team. Local travel is not a part of the job role. You are
likely to work 5 to 6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours every
day. This may vary from organization to organization.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The following institutes offers courses on Secretarial Practice or Corporate Secretaryship.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES 3
1. Chhatrapati Shahuji Maharaj University, Mumbai, Maharashtra
2. Maharani's Arts, Commerce and Management College for Women,
Mysuru, Karnataka
3. College of Vocational Studies, New Delhi
4. Young Men's Christian Association, New Delhi VA
5. National Institute of Open Schooling, Noida, Uttar Pradesh
6. Indian Institute of Skill Development Training, Indore, Madhya Pradesh
7. Madras University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu <p _
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Bhagini Nivedita College, New Delhi
2. Guru Nanak Khalsa College for Women, Ludhiana, Punjab EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
3. Dr. nel Rai Bachchan Mahavidyalaya, Uttar Pradesh Karma Dolma is a civil servant of Central Tibetan
4. Shanti Devi Arya Mahila College, Dinanagar, Punjab Administration. Dolma pursued a Diploma in
5. ACMT Education College, New Delhi Secretarial Practice from the Delhi Board of
6. PVP Women's University, Mumbai, Maharashtra Technical Education following which she was
7. Ahimsa Women Polytechnic, New Delhi appointed by the Central Tibetan Administration
8. Air Force Vocational College, New Delhi (CTA) as contract staff at Department of Home. :
9. International Women Polytechnic. Guruaram, Haryana There she served as an assistant to the liaison officer
; _ sscseinialicy C10 ug _ y ; of the US 1,000 Tibetan Immigration Project. After
10. Newcent Training Academy (Located in various Cities) completing the project in June 1993, she was
appointed as Sponsorship Secretary and in May
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE 1997, she was selected via the entrance
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU), examination for the post of Office
New Delhi Secretary. *
Source: https;//tibet.net/saturday-shout-out-
cta-civil-servant-karma-dolma/
“The above information is for training purposes only and will not
ae be used for any commercial gains

Sommelier is a trained wine professional, typically working at an 7“
upscale or fine dining restaurant. Sommeliers are responsible for
every aspect of the wine service, starting with the creation of the N
restaurant wine list to looking after floor service to restaurant visitors.

Mar

PERSONAL TRAITS x.

« You can comfortably talk with everyone

- You are a careful and organized person

- Expert knowledge of wine

+ Highly developed sense of taste and smell

+ Cultural sensitivity towards wine

SCHOLARSHIPS recs | COURSE FEE

« National Scholarship Portal - Visit =) Ulte qj piess cause Hoe Telmges [ekwvee
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there INR 60,000 — 70,000" per month.
are Central Government schemes offered by . ; ;
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and tess vet — fe ectimates pumeers and
State Schemes.” will vary trom Institute To Insiiture.

e Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY)

- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/
is A government initiative providing skill training ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
and certification in various sectors, with financial ees
SLs ppeMt leelszrel On ete SO Hype. 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream.
e National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme 2. Pursue Diploma in Wine Tasting.
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ OR
provides stipends Usvel g}eitcimilel= walle they gain Complete Bachelor’s in Wine Technology, followed
on-the-job training at approved organizations in by a certificate course in Wine Tasting
the aviation and logistics sector. OR ,

+ AICTE- Visit https://www.aicte-india.org/ Complete Bachelor's in Wine Technology or any
offers scholarships and fellowships ue students other related subject, pursue specialization courses
Gurell in AICTE-approved sities UN or Master’s in Wine and Gastronomy/ Sustainable
financial aids support technical and management _: .
courses. Viticulture and Oenology from an international

. . _ institute.

« Scholarships are also available in the institutes
based on merit.” Please check the duration of the course during enrolment

“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from

time to time) fy

LOANS | EXPECTED INCOME |

.Vi dya Lakshmi, onary dyalakshmi.co.in, inc These figures are indicative and subject to change.
portal for students seeking education loan. This ' The approx. salary of a Sommelier ranges
portal has been developed under the guidance of ‘ between INR 10,000 - 4,17,000* or more
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of | per month.
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). Source: https://www.payscale.com/re-

« Some states have student credit cards with low | search/IN/Job=Sommelier/Salary?loggedin —!
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, lee
Bihar, etc. bees nee ec ne ecnee scene cnencnennenenerregereerersea .

¢ All banks give education loans. see ee ee ee ee ee

QD etter eee

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Breweries, Upscale restaurants, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
Hospitality and Tourism sector (such as cruises). ‘itechnttony Sorannclher — Centred
Entrepreneurship: You can choose to be a wine writer, Sommelier —+ Advanced Sommelier >
wine critic or open up your own brewery. Master Sommelier
Work Environment: You will be working in either a bar
or wine shop or a restaurant or a business selling wine.
You are likely to work long hours, including evenings and
weekends, when restaurants are busiest. You may travel
to wine-producing regions to meet with wine makers
and learn about new wines.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
»\ f
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY? SJ is
‘ U y
Students can of opt. BHM, B.Sc. HMCTT, @
Diploma courses to become a professional . wo
Sommelier. oe
YJ
oo. . re ©)
This list of institutes is indicative only S
Government Institutes
1. Institute of Hotel Management, located across
diffrent states/UTs of India
2. Bundelkhand University, Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh
3. Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal |
University, Srinagar, UHtrakhand
4. Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, |
Haryana
5. Mizoram University, Aizawl, Mizoram
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
1. Indian Wine Academy, Delhi
2. Manipal Academy of Higher Education,
Manipal, Karnataka | EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
3. Institute for Wine and Beverage Studies
(IWBS), New Delhi Karishma Grover is a winemaker and sommelier
4. Wine Academy of India, Chennai, with a Bachelor's degree in Viticulture and Enology
Tamil Nadu from University of California, Davis. She is the first
5. Tulleeho Wine Academy, Bengaluru, Mumbai woman winemaker of India and currently the brand
and Delhi manager for DAOU Family Estates, a winemaking
6. Sona Holland Wine Academy, Mumbai, company.:
Maharashtra
7. Sake Sommelier Academy, Haryana Source: htips;//guns2gewurztraminer.com/karish-
ma-grover/
‘The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains.
744

Supply Chain Manager is a professional who is incharge of every
stage of an organization's supply chain, from purchasing raw
materials to production. They are required to ensure the right
amount of product is made at the right time, as well as coordinate
the storage of the product with their team members.
Bar (ad
PERSONALITY TRAITS WW. ¢
+ You like to keep your things organised \
+ You pay attention to details while working
+ You are comfortable communicating with others
» You like to lead
SCHOLARSHIPS AN
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and Frees | COURSE FEE
State Schemes.” RC, The approx. course fee ranges between
e Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) INR 1,71,000 - 16,00,000*
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/ . .
is A government initiative providing skill training oe ih, re estimated mempers and
and certification in various sectors, with financial i :
support based on course type.
e National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ = EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain OD vicccccccceeententeeeteeeneentnans
on-the-job training at approved organizations in
the aviation and logistics sector. 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream (preferably
« AICTE- Visit https://www.aicte-india.org/ commerce). .
offers scholarships and fellowships to students 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (BBA/BBM) in
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These Business Administration/ business management.
financial aids support technical and management OR
courses. Complete Bachelor’s degree and follow it up with
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes Master's (MBA) in the same discipline.
based on merit.”
a . Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from
time to time) ee
LOANS | EXPECTED INCOME !
9 : 5 ° oe | ‘These figures are indicative & subject to change. |
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This | The approx. salary of a Supply Chain |
portal has been developed under the guidance of M PPrOX. i ' PPly
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of anager ranges Be ween
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks INR 25,250 — 1,67,000° per month
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low sours: nie a Sy ve are re
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, 1 Seare YIN/Job=Supply_Chain_Man-
Bihar, etc. ;  ager/Salary _
- All banks give education loans. [SEuSdSEEEDEDEDEDTEEEETEEED DEDEDE TEED EERE EEEEEEEEIEEEDL _
QB DPIDDIDIIII ga

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: Production units, Private and Public
production companies, E-commerce companies,
Courier companies, Cottage based industries, Shipping Supply Chain Management Trainee —
companies, Military and so on. Supply Chain Manager — Operations Head
— Logistics Head
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5 to
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day. Shift system is
applicable.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Management.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Deen Dayal Upadhyaya College, New Delhi
2. University of Jammu, Jammu and Kashmir
3. Maharaja Sayajirao University Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat
4. University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, Dehradun, Uttarakhand
5. Indian Institute of Management, Rohtak, Haryana
6. Doon University, Dehradun, Uttarakhand
7. Department of Management Sciences, Savitribai Phule Pune University,
Pune, Maharashtra
8. Indian Intitute of Tourism and Travel Management,
Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and
accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Raisoni Group of Institutions, Nagpur,Maharashtra
2. Sunrise University, Alwar, Rajasthan EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD
3. Army Institute of Management and Technology,
Greater Noida,Uttar Pradesh Monika Mittal is an Indian Supply Chain Manager
. associated with ‘YUM ! brands’. She has completed
Senet Sesewel Siiversry, Clu lserigfel, Nelitsitelse her Bachelor's degree in applied science (B.A.Sc) in
; g pp ( )
9. Arcade Business College, Patna, Bihar Food Science and Technology after which she
6. Oxbridge Business School, Bengaluru, Karnataka received her Master's degree in Packaging science
7. Jyoti Nivas College, Bengaluru, Karnataka from the Indian Institute of Packaging (IIP). Ms. Mittal
8. National Institute of Business Excellence, is enthusiastic about Supply Chain, Food Technology
Bengaluru, Karnataka and Packaging."
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE rien suk. Zs hon ony’ womenleacer
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU),
New Delhi “The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains
746

Tour Guides are professionals who are certified and licensed
by the government to lead others on tours or trips. \
a
PERSONALITY TRAITS yr ae
+ You like working outdoors \
+ You like to lead rg
« You can make people work under your directions
« Knowledge on natural and cultural resources FEES COURSE FEE
eC, The approx. course fee ranges between
INR 40,000 - 3,00,000*
‘These figures are estimated numbers and
SCHOLARSHIPS will vary from Institute to Institute.
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there =
are Central Government schemes offered by EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and ;
State Schemes.” 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream.
; ; ;
e Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree in Tourism
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/ Studies/Tourism Management/Travel and Tour
is a government initiative providing skill training Management/Hospitality Management/
and certification in various sectors, with financial Archaeology or any other related subject and
support based on course type. obtain license approved by the Ministry of Tourism
e National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme savers as Tour Guide.
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ oo,
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain Complete a B.Voc (Bachelor of Vocation) in
on-the-job training at approved organizations in Tourism and obtain license approved by the
the aviation and logistics sector. Ministry of Tourism to work as Tour Guide.
- AICTE- Visit https://www.cicte-india.org/ OR 7
offers scholarships and fellowships to students Pursue Diploma or certificate course in
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These Tourism/Travel and Tourism/Tourism Management
financial aids support technical and management and obtain license approved by the Ministry of
courses. Tourism to work as Tourist Guide.
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes OR ; a
based on merit* Pursue NSOF (National Skills Qualification
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Framework) Level 4 qualification in Tour Guide
time to time) and obtain license approved by the Ministry of
Tourism to work as Tourist Guide..
LOANS Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Gi EXPECTED INCOME
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks ‘These figures are indicative and subject to change.
Association (IBA). ;
« Some states have student credit cards with low Ne ae eA ye ooo. ranges
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, emween , ~ BONG ormore
Bihar, etc. i per month.
> AlBaits give ealuasiton leans, Source: https;//www.payscale.com/re-
| search/IN/Job=Tour_Guide/Salary 17
Q a aarararara » 747

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?

Places of Work: Central and state government EXPECTED GROWTH PATH fi”

religious/heritage/historical sites, travel agencies,

museums, outdoor guided trips Tour Guide — Specialist Guide — Tour

(mountaineering/skiing/scuba diving) and safaris Manager — Tour Director — Tour Leader —

among others. Operations Manager — Product

Entrepreneurship: You can work independently. Manager — Tourism Manager

Work Environment: It is a field job. You will be

managing a team of tourists. Local travel is an important

part of the job profile. Agencies usually works for 5 to 6

days a week and 8 to 9 hours every day. This may vary

from agency to agency.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Indian Institute of Tourism and Traval Managemet across

different States/UTs of India different centers of India

2. Indra Gandhi National Open University, New Delhi

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

1. Thomas Cook Central of Learning, Mumbai, Maharashtra

2. Kuoni Academy, Mumbai , Maharashtra
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Twenty-four-year-old Komal Darira is the
founder of Women for World, a travel
organisation. She started her unconventional
journey as a tour guide for Intrepid Travel, a
travel company based out of Delhi when she
was 19-years old. She has Bachelor's in Mass
Communication from Guru Gobind Singh
Indraprastha University.”
Source: https;//www.traveldailymedia.com/i-
wta-komal-darira-women-for-world/
‘The above information is for training purposes only and

748 will not be used for any commercial gains

Tour Operator is responsible for accommodating and designing the ==.
holiday itinerary and content needed for the holiday. They sell the g — >
package either directly to the consumer or use the services of a 4 |
travel agent to do so. 6
Mar | 4 ,
PERSONALITY TRAITS x. \ Ln "
« You have networking skills \
« You have leadership and teamwork skills \
« You have problem solving abilities we —
+ You possess clear and effective communication skills = l
SCHOLARSHIPS
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit recs | COURSE FEE
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there —&Y The approx. course fee ranges between
are Central Government schemes offered by GF INR 15,000-6,00,000*
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes.” ‘These figures are estimated numbers and
ill [ itute.
¢ Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) will vary from Institute fo Institute
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/ =
is a government initiative providing skill training EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
and certification in various sectors, with financial
support based on course type. 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream.
e National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (BBA) in Travel
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ and Tourism Management.
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain OR
on-the-job training at approved organizations in Complete Bachelor's degree in any subject and
the aviation and logistics sector. pursue MBA degree in Travel and Tourism
¢ AICTE- Visit https://www.aicte-india.org/ Management.
offers scholarships and fellowships to students OR
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These Pursue a Diploma course in Travel and Tourism
financial aids support technical and management Management.
courses. OR
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes Experience with government license or permission
based on merit.” to operate as an individual is the prerequisite.
ioian of these scholarships can vary wer Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
LOANS a |G) XPecteD INcomE |
° Vidya Lakshmi, www.vidy alakshmi.co.in, Isa . ‘These figures are indicative and subject to change.
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of | The approx. salary of a Tour Operator
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of i ranges between INR 8,000-65,750* or more |
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
ma i per month.
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low Source: https;//www.salaryexpert.com/ |
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, salary/job/tour-operator/india
Bihar, etc. _
« All banks give education loans. nnn ee
g QD ee © © © © © © © © © 749

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Travel agencies, tour companies. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
Entrepreneurship: You can start your own business. Tour Operator — Tour Manager — Tour
Work Environment: You will be working both indoor and Director — Tour Leader — Opsteitens
outdoor. You are likely to spend time over the phone Manager — Product Manager — Tourism
arranging accommodation, transportation or ticketing Manager
options with vendors, such as hotels and airlines. You may
travel to different places to evaluate the quality of
accommodations or attractions so that you can make
appropriate recommendations to customers. You are
likely to work 6 days a week 9 to 10 hours everyday.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by various institutes as Bachelor and
Masters Degree Programme
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES be |
a
1. Institute of Hotel Management, y
across diffrent centers of India IL
2. Bundelkhand University, Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh
3. Hemvati Nandan Bahuguna Garhwal University, Srinagar,
Uttrakhand
4. Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, Haryana
5. Mizoram University, Aizawl, Mizoram
6. Central University of Tamil Nadu, Thiruvarur, Tamil Nadu
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if the Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying)
1. Welcome Graduate School of Hotel Administration,
Manipal, Karnataka EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD (J
2. Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka Sumitra Senapaty is the founder of Women
3. Banarsidas Chandiwala Instiute of Hotel Management and On Wanderlust (WOW) club. She studied
Catering Technoloy, New Delhi Hotel Management from Catering Institute,
4. Bharati Vidyapeeth Deemed University, Pune, Maharashtra Delhi and BA from Delhi University. After some
6. Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh freelance writer, she started this club for solo
7. Christ University, Bengaluru, Karnataka women to travel in groups, prioritizing their
8. Chandigarh University, Mohali, Punjab safety and security.”
Source: http;//www.thinklink.in/blog/sumi-
tra-senapaty
‘The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains
750

TRANSPORTATION MANAGER is
y 8
Transportation Manager has to look after and manage daily ——
transportation, shipping, and distribution operations. These managers are r) @ alu
responsible for ensuring that complete orders are shipped and delivered
in a timely manner. ? =i
eae 1 i TH gee
PERSONALITY TRAITS w. ih ¥ y = —
a a_i
+ You like to keep your things organised
« You pay attention to details while working
« You are comfortable communicating with others
SCHOLARSHIPS
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit recs | COURSE FEE
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there =A Th f s between
are Central Government schemes offered by Y INR 151000 216.00 000°.
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and a aon
State Schemes.” ‘These figures are estimated numbers and
¢ Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) will vary from Institute fo Institute.
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/
is a government initiative providing skill training =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
and certification in various sectors, with financial a
support based on course type. 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream (preferably
¢ National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme commerce).
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (BBA/BBM) in
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain Business Administration/business management.
on-the-job training at approved organizations in OR
the aviation and logistics sector. Complete Bachelor’s degree and follow it up with
¢ AICTE- Visit https://www.aicte-india.org/ Master’s (MBA) in the same discipline. Master of
offers scholarships and fellowships to students Business Administration (MBA) in Logistics and
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These Supply Chain Management/ MBA in Transportation
financial aids support technical and management and Logistics.
courses. OR
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes Diploma in Logistics & Transport Management.
based on merit.” OR
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Certificate in Logistics and Supply Chain
time to time) Management/ Transport Management/Freight
Forwarding and Customs Clearance.
LOANS Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a ee
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of EXPECTED INCOME
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of le" “These figures are taken from NCS and are
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks indicative and subject to change
Association (IBA). .
: : 1 The approx. salary of a Transportation
. Some states have student credit cards with low ' Manager ranges between
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, ' INR 40,000 - 1,20,000* per month
Bihar, etc. ’ a
« All banks give education loans. | Source: https;//bit.ly/3wYWOG3 1
$ See eee eo am

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of Work: Production units, Private and Public EXPECTED GROWTH PATH f7
production companies, E-commerce companies,
Courier companies, Cottage based industries, Shipping Manager, Transport — Deputy General
companies, Military and so on. Manager — Senior Operations Manager —
Work Envi Th im wyoically 54 Chief Operating Officer — Chief Executive
ork Environment: The work timings are typica fo) F F ;
6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours per day Shift system is Officer — Vice President, Operations
applicable.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Management.
This list of Institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Deen Dayal Upadhyaya College, New Delhi
2. University of Jammu, Jammu and Kashmir
3. Maharaja Sayajirao University Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat
4. University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, Dehradun,Uttarakhand
5. Indian Institute of Management, Rohtak, Haryana
6. Doon University, Dehradun, Uttarakhand
7. Department of management Sciences, Savitribai Phule Pune University,
Pune, Maharashtra
8. Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management,
Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and
accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
]. Raisoni Group of Institutions, Nagpur, Maharashtra EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
2. Sunrise University, Alwar, Rajasthan
3. Army Institute of Management and Technology, Tulsi Mirchandaney is the Managing Director eh
Greater Noida Uttar Pradesh Blue Dart Aviation. Tulsi has an MBA degree in
4, Sharanabasava University, Gulbarga, Karnataka International Aviation from Concordia University,
6 G Montreal and has been felicitated by the Ministry of
5. Arcade Business College, Patna, Bihar Civil Aviation for her contribution to Civil Aviation in
6. Oxbridge Business School, Bengaluru, Karnataka the country. She celebrates the women couriers who
7. Jyoti Nivas College, Bengaluru, Karnataka work for Blue Dart, braving unfriendly conditions.
8. National Institute of Business Excellence, Mirchandaney started her career in aviation around
Bengaluru, Karnataka 50 years ago as a Cargo Pilot in a male-dominated
industry, and made her mark as an exemplary
transportation manager.”
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU), Source: hitps;///www.bluedartaviation.com/tulsi.htm
“The above information is for training purposes only and
752 will not be used for any commercial gains

A Travel Consultant is a professional who works for travel agencies or ) ¢
tour companies. They research, design and organize different tour
packages based on customers’ budget and interests. They look into alll
the logistical aspects of a tour such as booking tickets and
accommodations. _
Mane
PERSONALITY TRAITS WW. {
|
+ You like to explore different places and cultures |, =e
+ You have an interest in travel »
« You have strong communication skills
+ You like to work in teams Frees | COURSE FEE
« You have knowledge on cultural and natural resources SAT
Y he approx. course fee ranges between
INR 40,000 - 3,00,000°
‘These figures are estimated numbers and
SCHOLARSHIPS will vary from Institute to Institute.
e National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there = EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
are Central Government schemes offered by AQ) oeccccccicecscssceenseeeensaees
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream.
State Schemes." 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (BBA) in Travel
e Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) and Tourism Management.
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/ OR
is a government initiative providing skill training Complete Bachelor's degree in any subject and
and certification in various sectors, with financial pursue MBA degree in Travel and Tourism
support based on course type. Management/Master of Tourism Administration
e National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme (MTA)/Master of Business Administration (MBA) in
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ Travel and Tourism/Hospitality and Tourism
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain Management/M.Sc. in Hospitality and Tourism
on-the-job training at approved organizations in Management.
the aviation and logistics sector. OR
e AICTE- Visit https://www.aicte-india.org/ Pursue a Diploma course in Travel and Tourism
offers scholarships and fellowships to students Management.
enrolled in AICTE-approved institutions. These OR
financial aids support technical and management Certificate in Travel and Tourism Management/
COUISES. Airline Ticketing and Travel Agency Operations/
. Scholarships ote also available in the institutes Hospitality and Travel Management/International
based on merit. Tourism and Travel Services/Travel and Tourism
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Marketing.
time to time)
LOANS Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a ee
portal for students seeking education loan. This Gi EXPECTED INCOME
portal has been developed under the guidance of “The figures are taken from NCS and indicative
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of and subject to change.
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). The approx. salary of a Travel Consultant
« Some states have student credit cards with low ranges eiween INR 29,000 - 45,000" or
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, | more per month.
ees | Source: https://bit ly/3GcUUKK |
¢ All banks give education loans. ource: tips //Ditly/3Gc
L tee ee eee 28

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Tour companies (Private and Government), EXPECTED GROWTH PATH fi"
Tour Desks in Hotels, Travel agencies.
Travel Consultant — Travel Senior

Entrepreneurship: You can also start your own travel /tour Consultant — Manager Travel Operations
company after a few years of experience.

Work Environment: This job involves not only desk work, but

also involves a lot of travel. It also involves working for

irregular and long hours. Knowing more than one language

is an added advantage.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This course is offered by various Institutes across different

States/UTs of India. —< wr
This list of institutes is indicative only 4 i)
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES i = |
1. Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh XE
2. Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management,

Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh Avan
3. Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management,

Bhubaneswar, Odisha
4. National Institute of Tourism and Hospitality Management, D

Hyderabad, Telangana
5. Jawaharlal Nehru Rajkeeya Mahavidyalaya, Port Blair,

Andaman and Nicobar ;

6. SNDT Womens University, Mumbai, Maharashtra
7. Maharashtra State Institute of Hotel Management and

Catering Technology, Pune, Maharashtra
8. Manyawar Kanshiram Institute of Tourism Management,

Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
PRIVATE INSTITUTES Vilakshna Tyagi is a Travel Consultant at New
(Please check if the Institute is affiliated and accredited with York-based Compass India. Previously, she worked
UGC before applying) as a Travel Consultant at Intersight Tours & Travels,
1. Christ University, Bangalore, Karnataka India. She has a Master’s in Tourism and Travel
2. NSHM Knowledge Campus, Kolkata, West Bengal Se icles usc Dev ei i

. Vishwavidyalaya, Uttarakhand.
3. Institute of Management Study, Kolkata, West Bengal
4. The Bhopal School of Social Sciences, Bhopal, Source: https;//www.zoominfo.com/p/

Madhya Pradesh Vilakshna-Tyagi/- 1622842155
5. Subhas Bose Institute of Hotel Management, Kolkata,

West Ben g al “The above information ts for training purposes only and will not

be used for any commercial gains
6. ICFAI University, Baddi, Himachal Pradesh
7. Dr. DY Patil University, Navi Mumbai, Maharashtra
8. Hindustan Institute of Technology and Science, Chennai,
Tamil Nadu
754

An Urban Planner provides assistance in resolving the issues in cities and surrounding environment using knowledge from
the fields of engineering, architectural design and management. Urban planners create and develop programmes and
plans for sustainable and optimum land usage.
=
, ooo
7
.
|
¢ Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship
- This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the
first year of their engineering undergraduate course.
Eligibility includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.” =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
¢ Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY) vr rrrrrseesrerenescsce
- Visit https://www.pmkvyofficial.org/pmkvy2/ 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream.
isa government initiative providing skill training 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Planning/Civil
and certification in various sectors, with financial Engineering/Architecture/ Geography/Economics/
support based on course type. Public Administration/Political Science/Urban or
¢ National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme Regional Planning.
(NAPS) - Visit www.apprenticeshipindia.gov.in/ OR
provides stipends to apprentices while they gain Complete Bachelor’s degree,followed by Master's
on-the-job training at approved organizations In degree in Planning / Urban and Regional Planning
the aviation and logistics sector. followed by Ph.D. in Urban and Regional Planning/
¢ National Scholarship Portal - visit Environmental Planning.
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are OR
central government schemes offered by different Certificate Course in Urban Planning and
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Development/ Geographic Information Systems.
Schemes.”

+ Scholarships are also available in the institutes based For admissions to the Bachelor courses, you must
on merit.” qualify entrance examinations such as JEE Main,
“(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) NATA, UPSEE, etc. Admissions to PG course require

entrance exam like GATE.
. Please check the duration of the course during enrolment

+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for

students seeking education loan. This portal has been

developed under the guidance of the Department of

Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of Ga

Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian

Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and

track the education loan applications on the website.
« Some states have student credit cards with low interest

rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
« All banks give education loans.

ren °°

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Any recognized college offering Bachelors in Civil engineering and Architecture.
A few colleges offer this course as Bachelor's in Urban Planning and allied subjects:
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
]. Jawaharlal Nehru Architecture and Fine Arts University, Hyderabad, Telangana
2. Hemchandracharya North Gujarat University, Patan, Gujarat
3. Dr. A.PJ.. Abdul Kalam Technical University, Lucknow,Uttar Pradesh
4. Goa College of Architecture, Panaji, Goa
5. Pandit Lakhmi Chand State University of Performing and Visual Arts, Rohtak, Haryana
6. Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra
7. Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Gujarat
8. Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur,West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
]. Swarrnim Startup and Innovation University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD G
2. PP Savani University, Surat, Gujarat
3. Mangalam School of Architecture and Planning,
Kottayam, Kerala
4. BMS School of Architecture, Bangalore, Karnataka
5. Sunrise University, Alwar, Rajasthan
6. Smt Manoramabai Mundle College of Architecture,
Nagpur,Maharashtra
7. Anant National University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
8. Hindu College of Design, Architecture and Planning,
Sonepat, Haryana
Information on institute rankings available at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
756 Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU), New Delhi

Public Policy,
Law and safety =
—— ws

fy ye
A ays
Srl = ft
@ A Xo
is *
> WW’
aie
$0 oF
tiv

“0 i
one &

7 »
PERSONALITY TRAITS wx. cor
\ 1 | fan |
recs | COURSE FEE
EA
The Indian law does not lay down any specific
qualifications for arbitrators.
Complete 10+2 and pursue a Bachelor's degree
like LLB/Arbitration Law/ B.Com./ CA/CS/
Engineering/etc. and opt for a professional
certificate course in arbitration,from Indian Intitute
of Arbitration and Mediation.
Register with Indian Council of Arbitration
Or
Complete 10+2 , pursue a Bachelor's degree like
LLB/Arbitration Law, and then opt for a PG
Diploma in Arbitation Law/ LLM.
Entrance Exams:
Law entrance exams are given below:
CLAT (Common Law Admission Test)
/ CLAT PG /AILET PG /AILET (All India Law
Entrance Test) /LSAT (The Law School Admission
Test) /ILI CAT.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
()exrecte INCOME
-

WHERE WILL YOU WORK
Places of work: Corporates,Independent Consulting,
Entrepreneurship. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH A”
Entrepreneurship: You can work as a consultant or Arbitrator Trainee / Junior Arbitrator—
freelancer. Arbitrator—
Senior Arbitrator—
Work Environment: You will be required to work at the Lead Arbitrator / Head of Arbitration Panel—>
desk as well as undertake some travel. Extended Arbitration Consultant / Advisor
working hours are expected.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Law.
‘This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi,Uttar Pradesh
2. National Law University, New Delhi
3. Indian Institute of Arbitration and Mediation, New Delhi
4. Indian Intitute of Arbitration and Mediation, Cochin, Kerala
5. Indian Institute of Management, Calcutta, West Bengal
6. University of Allahabad, Prayagraj, ,Uttar Pradesh
7. Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University, New Delhi
8. Maharashtra National Law University, Mumbai, Maharashtra
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
"(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC before applying)
].Bharati Vidyapeeth,Pune,Maharashtra
2. Vivekananda Institute of Professional Studies, New Delhi
3.School of Law, Christ University,Bengaluru,Karnataka
4.Galgotias University, Dankaur,Uttar Pradesh
5.Symbiosis International University Pune, Maharashtra 66
6.Chanderprabhu Jain College of Higher Studies and EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD
School of Law, New Delhi Rajendra Barot - Mr. Barot is highly regarded in
7 Career Point University (CPUR), Kota, Rajasthan India’s dispute resolution market for his broad
8. Chettinad School of Law,Kelambakkam, Tamil Nadu arbitration and litigation practice. He regularly
advises clients on a wide range of commercial
cases, as well as insolvency disputes. With over
27 years’ experience, he heads the AZB and
Partners! Dispute Resolution practice. He has
advised and represented clients in institutional
and ad-hoc arbitrations seated in and outside
India.
Source:https;//www.azbpartners.com/people-p
ost/rajendra-barot
‘The above information is for training purposes only
and will not be used for any commercial gains
760

Mar ~
PERSONALITY TRAITS W. Eg) SY
| i
i NN . A
a
Pa: = (1 1
(
Fees | COURSE FEE
EA
1. Complete 10+2 in any subject stream
2. Take the Common Law Admission Test (CLAT) or
All India Law Entrance Test (AILET) or Law School
Admission Test (LSAT) to enrol into a five-year
integrated course
OR
Complete Bachelor's degree (LLB) in Law
OR
Complete Bachelor's degree followed by a
Master’s degree (LLM) in the same field
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
© EXPECTED INCOME
- 7

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Law/Economics.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
]. National Law School of India University, Bangalore, Karnataka
2. National Law University, New Delhi
3. Indian Law Society's Law College, Pune, Maharashra
4. National Academy for Legal Studies and Research, Hyderabad, Telangana
5. West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences, Kolkata, West Bengal
6. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi
7. Gujarat National Law University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat
8. National Law University, Jodhpur,Rajasthan
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J

PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying)
1. Symbiosis Law School, Pune, Maharashtra
2. Army Institute of Law, Mohali, Punjab
3. School of Law, Christ University, Bangalore, Karnataka
4. KIIT School of Law, Bhubaneshwar, Odisha
5. Amity Law School, New Delhi
6. Jindal Global Law School, Sonipat, Haryana
7. School of Law, University of Petroleum and

University Studies, Dehradun, Uttarakhand
8. ICFAI Law School, Hyderabad, Telangana
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)

762

A Detective is a trained professional, either a member of the police force or a private investigator, whose function is
to solve crimes. They can handle both criminal as well as civil type of cases.
=
ly,
= ky tL 4%,
he :=
-
0: —
@ ——
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’
« Scholarships are also available in the institutes
based on merit”
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from = EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
time to time) FO voeesreessseessetesseeessseesssessseeseuesssseesssessssesssessssessasessaee
1. Complete 10+2 in any stream
2. Complete a Bachelor’s degree (BA/BSc) in
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Criminology and Forensics/Forensic Science
portal for students seeking education loan. This OR
portal has been developed under the guidance of Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Master's degree in the same or related field
Finance), Department of Higher Education (Ministry
of Education) and Indian Banks Association (IBA) Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
«Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc. o-
+ All banks give education loans
763

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Government Agencies or Private EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7"
Detective Companies.
Detective Trainee — Assistant Detective
Entrepreneurship: You can choose to work independently — Field Detective — Crime Investigative
and take up assignments as and when available or start Officer
your own company. OR
Detective Trainee — Assistant Detective
Work Environment: You will spend a substantial amount of — Field detective > Crime Investigative
time in the field making enquiries, meeting people, collect- Officer — Private Investigator
ing evidence or following up leads. At a junior level you
will not head a team. You are likely to work in a team. You
are not likely to have a fixed schedule and need to be
flexible depending on the work at hand. You may have to
work extra hours and on weekends depending on the
gravity of the case.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The courses are offered by Institutes offering subjects like Criminology, Forensic
Science, or Criminal Justice.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj Nagpur University, Nagpur, Maharashtra
2. University of Rajasthan, Jaipur, Rajasthan
3. Bangalore University, Bangalore, Karnataka
4. University of Lucknow, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
5. University of Allahabad, Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh
6. University of Madras, Chhennai, Tamil Nadu
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited
ith UGC bef lyi
wane peters PPG) EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
, ee Te paar Sssen ‘I Nad Rajani Pandit is credited as the first female private
- Rarunya Rniversily, -oimbatore, tamil Nadu detective in India. She has solved over 75,000 cases
oh Clas Mla, Rajgarh, Mtelivye Pieetelesan and won over 57 awards. She has done her
“ Jefe Uighye|ecerr CMe sito Univeral, ell py, eles: tel Bachelor's in Marathi literature from Ruparel College,
3 SUllisr Caine) Uinsereniy, Sills, Meghalaya Mumbai. After completing her education, decided to
6. Mody University - Mody University of Science become a private eye. In 1983, Rajani started
7 one eee ee Secs offering her services and by the time she was 25 in
- Career Point University, Kota, Rajasthan 1991, she started her agency named Rajani Pandit
. ; Detective Services. *
Information on the institute rankings can be found
at - hitp;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html Source:
https://www.indiatimes.com/trending/social-relevan
ce/rajani-pandit-lady-
bond-indias-first-female-detective-572548.html
“The above information is for training purposes only and will not
764 be used for any commercial gains

« You are physically fit. Certificate /Dip| 6 he—1 '
; ; ertificate/Diploma (6 months — 1 year
You like to help others. — INR 5,000 — 50,000"
« You are comfortable communicating with others. ;
. . . . Undergraduate Diploma (1-2 years)
« You pay attention to details while working. INR 20,000 - 1,00,000°
Postgraduate Diploma (1-2 years)
INR 30,000 - 1,50,000°
‘These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from institute to institute.
Certificate
Complete 10+2 in any stream (preferably with a focus
on physical education or vocational training). Look for
schools offering vocational education in security
services under the National Skills Qualification
Framework (NSOF).
Diploma
Diploma in Security Management. Offered by
vocational training institutes and polytechnics.
Undergraduate
Bachelor of Arts (BA) in Security Management,
Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.) in Crime and Security
Management. These programs are offered by
universities and specialized security institutes. Entrance
exams or direct admission may apply based on the
institution.
Postgraduate
Master of Arts (MA) in Security and Risk Management,
Master of Science (M.Sc.) in Security Studies or
Criminal Justice.
‘These figures are taken from NCS and are indicative
- and subject to change
= 2 \ . -
om) The approx. salary of a Firefighter ranges
o'r a! between INR 17,000 — 58,000" per month.
Source - https://bit.ly/3kjj7U
4 Pa
765

Fire Operator — Leading Fireman/Fire
Fighter — Sub-officer — Fire Prevention
Officer — Assistant Divisional Officer —
Divisional Officer — Deputy Chief Fire
Officer — Chief Fire Officer
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Institute of Fire Engineering, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. State Fire Training Centre, Various States-Karnataka,
Rajasthan
3. Fire and Emergency Services Training Institute, Panaji,
Goa
4. Nenu nstitete of Fire Engineering, Mumbai, Harshini Kanhekar’s life has been dealing with
fire, literally, for the past two decades. She is
India’s first female firefighter whose life inspires
PRIVATE INSTITUTES one to live trying and achieve the seemingly
1. Safety Officer and Fire Fighting Academy, Pune impossible. Harshini reminisced about the time she
Maharashtra ‘ ‘ finally got accepted into the NFSC (National Fire
2. Fire and Safety India Training Institute, Bengaluru, service Salles}: she talked about how her father
Karnataka called to give her the good news as he held onto
3. Institute of Fire and Safety Engineering, Kolkata, West the telegram in his hand Harshini's seven-semester
Bengal course needed the students to live on campus, but
for her, the rule was bent- allowing her to go home.
Harshini worked with heavy water and suction
hoses and performed mock drills with dummies.
Her first assignment was a cylinder blast in Shirdi,
when she was in college. Harshini performed
difficult tasks while she was just a student learning
the ways of life and fire fighting at the same time.
Before joining ONGC in 2006 (and eventually
becoming the Sr. fire officer), she dealt with
several fires across Mumbai, Kolkata and Delhi
where her six-hour operation in a tin factory
gained recognition. Today, Harshini is an inspiration
to women all over the country.”
‘ Source - womensweb.in/2022/03/harshini-
« ‘ | kanhekar-indias-first-woman-fre-fighter-inspiring-li
s fe-story-apr22wk 1 pa/
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains
766

QO,
* mr
PERSONALITY TRAITS . be
f 4
| Fees | COURSE FEE
Y
1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream
2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
(BA/B.Sc/B.Com/BBA/LLB) in any subject followed
by a Master's degree in Human Rights Law
Or
2. Complete a Bachelor's degree
(BA/B.Sc/B.Com/BBA/LLB) in any subject followed
by a PG Diploma in Human Rights Law
3. For admissions into Law colleges, you must
qualify entrance exams such as CLAT, AILET, LSAT,
MH CET Law, TS LAWCET, AP LAWCET, DU LLB, PU
LLB, SLS AIAT
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
© EXPECTED INCOME
:

EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Law.
“This list of institutes is indicative only.
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU),
]. National Law School, Bangalore, Karnataka New Delhi
2. Delhi University, New Delhi
3. Osmania Univerrsity, Hyderabad, Telangana
4. Govt. Law College, Kozhikode,Kerala
5. Indian Institute of Legal Studies, Dagapur, Siliguri, West Bengal
6. Uttarakhand Open University, Dehradun,Uttarakhand
7. Law College, Dehradun,Uttarakhand
8. National Law Univesity, Sonipat, Haryana
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if the Institute is affiliated and
accredited with UGC before applying)
1. Desh Bhagat University, Fatehgarh Sahib, Punjab 66
2. Christ College of Law, Bangalore, Karnataka EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD
3. NEF Law College, Guwahati, Assam
4. Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh
5. Army Institute of Law, Mohali, Punjab
6. Ashoka Law College, Kathua, Jammu and Kashmir
7.@. D Goenka University, Gurgaon, Haryana
8. BMS College of Law, Bengaluru, Karnataka
9. Azim Premji University, Bengaluru, Karnataka
10. IILM University, Gurgaon, Haryana
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
hitps://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
768

An International Relations Specialist is a professional with expertise in analyzing and managing relationships between countries and
international entities. Their primary focus is on understanding how global political, economic, cultural, and social factors influence
diplomacy and international cooperation. They work to foster positive relationships, promote peace, and develop strategies to
address global issues such as trade, security, human rights, and environmental sustainability.
ZX
as? la
~ \ Va
OQ / \el ~%
ZN 4 |
a
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes.”
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes
based on merit.” EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from 1. Complete 10+2 in any Stream preferably in
time to time) Arts/Humanities with Political Science
2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.A.) in
Political Science/International Relations/Defence
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a and strategic Studies/ Area Studies |
portal for students seeking education loan. This History/Geography/Economics/Sociology.
portal has been developed under the guidance of followed by Master’s degree in the same or
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of related field
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks OR
Association (IBA). After completing both graduate and post
: ; graduate degrees, pursue Ph.D. in International
0 Some states have student credit cards with low Relations/International Affairs
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc. Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
7 ==
Dee ee 209

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Governments, International
Organizations, Multinational Companies, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH Ae
Development Consulting Firms, NGOs, and Think Campaign Worker — International
Tanks. Relations Analyst > Political Analyst
Work Envrionment: This work includes travel. You will
generally work for 8/9 hours a day and for 5/6 hours
per week. Working from different time zones may be
common.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Political Science/International
Relations.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. National Law School of India University, Bangalore, Karnataka
2. National Law University, New Delhi
3. Indian Law Society's Law College, Pune, Maharashtra
4. National Academy for Legal Studies and Research, Hyderabad, Telangana
5. West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences, Kolkata, West Bengal
6. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi
7. Gujarat National Law University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat
8. National Law University, Jodhpur, Rajasthan
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited with EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
UGC before applying)
1. Symbiosis School of Liberal Arts, Symbiosis Avinash Paliwal is senior lecturer in International
International, Pune, Maharashtra Relations and Deputy Director of the SOAS South
2. Adamas University, Barasat, West Bengal Asia Institute. Previous to this he taught Defence
3. Amity University - Multiple states Studies at King’s College London and was the
4. St. Joseph's College, Bangalore, Karnataka Defence Academy Postdoctoral Fellow at the
5. Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Regional Security Research Centre at King's.
Karnataka Paliwal specialises in foreign and security policy
6. Shiv Nadar University, Noida,Uttar Pradesh analysis with regional focus on South Asia,
7. Kalinga University, Raipur,Chhattisgarh Afghanistan, and Myanmar. He holds an MA and
8. Ashoka University, Sonipat, Haryana PhD in International Relations from King’s College
London, and a BA (Hons) in Economics from the
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - University of Delhi.
https://www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html
Source: https;//www.soas.ac.uk/about/
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE avinash-paliwal
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains
770

1]
-n * a &
PERSONALITY TRAITS yf. a ay wt %.
/ oa
a in
Vida
ar /
| Fees | COURSE FEE
Y
1. Complete 10+2 in any stream
2. Complete Bachelor's degree (BA-LLB)
OR
Complete Bachelor's degree in any stream and
after complet LLB degree followed by a Master's
degree (LLM) and then clear the All India Judicial
Service or clear PCS-J, State Lavel exam.
3. For admissions into Law colleges, you must
qualify entrance exams such as CLAT, AILET, LSAT,
MH CET Law, TS LAWCET, AP LAWCET, DU LLB, PU
LLB, SLS AIAT
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
© EXPECTED INCOME
:

EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
oo
This course is offered by the Department of Law. =
This list of institutes is indicative only ZZ
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES >» a
]. National Law School of India University, Bangalore, Karnataka : 4 ” m/~
2. National Law University, New Delhi )
3. Indian Law Society, Pune, Maharashtra )
4. National Academy of Legal Studies and Research, Hyderabad, Telangana =
5. National University of Juridical Sciences, Kolkata, West Bengal | —_
6. National Law University, Cuttack,Odisha a=
7. Gujarat National Law University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat
8. National Law University, Jodhpur, Rajasthan i
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying)
1. Symbiosis Law School, Pune,Maharashtra
2. Army Institute of Law, Mohali, Punjab
3. School of Law, Christ University, Bangalore, Karnataka
4. KIIT School of Law, Bhubaneshwar, Odisha
5. Amity Law School, New Delhi
6. Jindal Global Law School, Sonipat, Haryana
7. School of Law, University of Petroleum and University
Studies, Dehradun, Uttarakhand EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD ro
8. ICFAI Law School, Hyderabad, Telangana
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https:;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
772

Bar
PERSONALITY TRAITS ®. ‘
ene } = \
——= |
FEES | COURSE FEE
EA
1. Complete 10+2 in any subject stream
2. Take the Common Law Admission Test (CLAT) or
All India Law Entrance Test (AILET) or Law School
Admission Test (LSAT) to enrol into a five-year
integrated course
OR
Complete Bachelor's degree (LLB) in Law
OR
Complete Bachelor's degree followed by a
Master's degree (LLM) in the same field
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Bi EXPECTED INCOME
:

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Law.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
]. National Law School of India University, Bangalore, Karnataka
2. National Law University, New Delhi
3. Indian Law Society's Law College, Pune, Maharahstra
4. National Law University Hyderabad , Telangana
5. West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences, Kolkata, West Bengal
6. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi
7. Gujarat National Law University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat
8. National Law University, Jodhpur , Rajasthan EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and
accredited with UGC before applying)
1. Symbiosis Law School, Pune, Maharashtra
2. Army Institute of Law, Mohali, Punjab
3. School of Law, Christ University, Bangalore, Karnataka
4. KIIT School of Law, Bhubaneshwar, Odisha
5. Amity Law School, New Delhi
6. Jindal Global Law School, Sonipat, Haryana
7. School of Law, University of Petroleum and University
Studies, Dehradun,Uttarakhand
8. ICFAI Law School, Hyderabad, Telangana
Information on Institute rankings is available at -
https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
774

* *
PERSONALITY TRAITS ¥. of)
a
* if -
w Pe
~< a £
A a
a
| Fees] COURSE FEE
Y?
1. Complete 10+2 in Science stream (Physics,
Chemistry, Mathematics)
2. Complete Bachelor's degree in any healthcare
related course and then pursue an LLB degree
Or
Complete Bachelor's degree in any healthcare
related course and then pursue a Diploma in
Medical Law and Ethics
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
© EXPECTED INCOME
:

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Law.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. National Law School of India University, Bangalore, Karnataka
2. National Law University, New Delhi
3. Indian Law Society's Law College, Pune, Maharashtra
4. National Academy for Legal Studies and Research, Hyderabad, Telangana
5. West Bengal National University of Juridical Sciences, Kolkata, West Bengal
6. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi
7. Gujarat National Law University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat
8. National Law University, Jodhpur, Rajasthan
PRIVATE INSTITUTES = . EXAMPLE FROMTHE FIELD [J
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying)
1. Symbiosis Law School, Pune, Maharashtra
2. Army Institute of Law, Mohali, Punjab
3. School of Law, Christ University, Bangalore, Karnataka
A. KIIT School of Law, Bhubaneshwar, Odisha
5. Amity Law School, New Delhi
6. Jindal Global Law School, Sonipat, Haryana
7. School of Law, University of Petroleum and
University Studies, Dehradun,Uttarakhand
8. ICFAI Law School, Hyderabad, Karnataka
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University
(IGNOU)
776

PATENT
ee ——_—
ar y,
PERSONALITY TRAITS Ww.
@
~ m=
FEES | COURSE FEE
[=
1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream
2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (LLB) in
Intellectual Property Rights
OR
Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
Master's degree in the same or related subject
3. For admissions into Law colleges, you must
qualify entrance exams such as CLAT, AILET, LSAT,
MH CET Law, TS LAWCET, AP LAWCET, DU LLB, PU
LLB, SLS AIAT
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
© EXPECTED INCOME
:

EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Law.
The list of institutes is indicative only (mm)
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES oll
]. National Law School, Bangalore, Karnataka
2. Delhi University, New Delhi
3. Osmania Univerrsity, Hyderabad, Telangana —__
4. Govt. Law College, Kozhikode, Kerala |
5. Indian Institute of Legal Studies, Dagapur, Siliguri, West Bengal a
6. Uttarakhand Open University, Dehradun,Uttarakhand @
7. Law College, Dehradun,Uttarakhand “|
8. National Law Univesity, Sonipat, Haryana Ww
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if the Institute is affiliated and
accredited with UGC before applying)
1. Desh Bhagat University, Fatehgarh Sahib, Punjab
2. Christ College of Law, Bangalore, Karnataka
3. NEF Law College, Guwahati, Assam
4. Amity University, Noida,,Uttar Pradesh
5. Army Institute of Law, Mohali, Punjab 66
6. Ashoka Law College, Kathua, Jammu and Kashmir EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD
7.G. D Goenka University, Gurgaon, Haryana
8. BMS College of Law, Bengaluru, Karnataka
9. Azim Premji University, Bengaluru, Karnataka
10. IILM University, Gurgaon, Haryana
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTES
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
778

Psephologists are professionals who study the patterns of elections, using past voting figures and their percentage,
public opinion polls and other related information. They estimate the results of the public opinion for the future
elections using statistical applications. India does not have an actual post called ‘Psephologist’. However, some
major parties have in-house analysts who can be called Psephologists. Several accomplished media editors, political
analysts, and marketing research scientists double up as Psephologists.
55% e
| ml 20% y tng
= a
55%
15% J Zo”
= alli S)
qu
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www-scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’ EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream .
based on merit’ 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Arts (B.A.) in
Political Science/
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Economics/Sociology/Management followed by
time to time) Master’s degree in Arts (M.A.) in Political Science
and complete PhD in Politics
OR
. _ .. Complete Bachelor’s degree in Science (B.Sc.) in
+ VidyaLakshmi, www. vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Statistics followed by Master’s degree in Science
peticl Ver siuiecais seckehig| Selection (ect Inks (B.Sc.) in Statistics and complete PhD in Politics
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, le
Bihar, etc.
« All banks give education loans.
779

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?

Places of Work: Research Firms, Museums, Universities, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH s7

Public Sector Firms or Historical Societies, Media, Resssmthiscis ant Jumtap Essdlaaiesistt > Sumrey

Publishing Industry. Analyst > Data Analyst — Election Strategist + Senior

Psephologist— Lead Analyst — Political Data Consultant

Work Environment: You are likely to spend most of your — Election Campaign Consultant — Chief Psephologist

time in offices, classrooms, and libraries. Working hours —Political Consultant for Political Parties or Media

are flexible. You may have to travel to distant cities or

countries. You are expected to visit archives or historic

sites for research.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This course is offered by the Department of Political Science/Statistics

This list of institutes is indicative only.

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Delhi School of Economics, New Delhi

2. Lady Shri Ram College, New Delhi

3. Hindu College, New Delhi

4. Lady Brabourne College, Kolkata, West Bengal

5. New College Institute of Management, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

6. St Joseph's College, Bangalore, Karnataka

7. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi

8. Devi Ahilya Vishwavidyalaya, Indore, Madhya Pradesh

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC before applying)

1. Fergusson College, Pune, Maharashtra

2. Mount Carmel College, Bangalore, Karnataka

3. St. Xavier's College, Kolkata, West Bengal

4. St. Andrews College of Arts Science and Commerce, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD GJ

Mumbai, Maharashtra Yogendra Yadav is an Indian activist, psephologist

5. Agra College, Agra, Uttar Pradesh and politician whose primary interests are in the

6. Arya Vidyapeeth College, Guwahati, Assam political and social sciences. He was a Senior

7. NIMS University, Jaipur, Rajasthan Fellow at the Centre for the Study of Developing

8. Jyoti Nivas College, Bengaluru, Karnataka Societies (CSDS), Delhi from 2004 to 2016. Prof.
Yadav's areas of interests include democratic

Information on Institute rankings is available at - theory, election studies, survey research, political

https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html theory, modern Indian political thought and Indian
socialism and has published extensively in

DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE academic journals and popular media on these

Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) themes.”
Source: https://southasia.berkeley.edu/
yogendra-yadav-politics-after-modi
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains

780

Bar
PERSONALITY TRAITS W.
a
'
FEES | COURSE FEE
EA
1. Complete 10+2 in any subject stream
2. Take the Common Law Admission Test (CLAT) or
All India Law Entrance Test (AILET) or Law School
Admission Test (LSAT) to enrol into a five-year
integrated course
OR
Complete Bachelor's degree (LLB) in Law
OR
Complete Bachelor's degree followed by a
Master's degree (LLM) in the same field
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
© EXPECTED INCOME
7

This course is offered by the Department of Public Policy and Administration.

This list of institutes is indicative only.

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Nizam College, Hyderabad, Telangana

2. AV. College of Arts, Science and Commerce, Hyderabad, Telangana

3. Lucknow University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh

4. Sarojini Naidu Vanita Mahavidyalaya, Hyderabad, Telangana

5. Government Arts College (Autonomous), Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu

6. Annamalai University, Chidambaram, Tamil Nadu

7. Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak, Haryana

8. Calicut University, Kozhikode, Kerala

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited with

UGC before applying)

1. Banasthali Vidyapith, Jaipur, Rajasthan

2. St Xaviers College, Jaipur, Rajasthan

3. Jyoti Nivas Pre-University College, Bangalore, Karnataka EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66

4. Mehr Chand Mahajan Dayanand Anglo Vedic College
for Women, Chandigarh

5. St Thomas! College, Thrissur, Kerala

6. Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh

7. Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj Nagpur University Nagpur,
Maharashtra

8. Shoolini University, Solan,Himachal Pradesh

Information on Institute rankings is available at -

https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html

DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE

Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)

782

A Social Worker is a professional who helps individuals, families, and communities improve their well-being and
address social issues. They work with people facing various challenges, such as poverty, mental health issues,
addiction, domestic violence, and disability, and they provide support through counseling, advocacy, and
connecting people with essential services.
s y
ny
: g
i |
a)
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes*
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes
based on merit’ ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
aan of these scholarships can vary from 1. Complete 10+2 in any subject stream
2. Complete Bachelors of Social Work/ Sociology
OR
Complete Bachelors of Social Work/Sociology,
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a followed by Master's of Social Work (MSW)
portal for students seeking education loan. This OR
portal has been developed under the guidance of Complete Bachelors in any subject and then a
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Master's of Social Work (MSW)
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc. o
+ All banks give education loans.
783 °

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Community Development Organizations,
Child Welfare and Human Service Agencies, Mental EXPECTED AEN, jolla w?
Health Facilities, Hospitals, Schools, Non-governmental Intern — Project Associate —
Organizations. Administrative Manager
OR
Work Environment: It involves extensive field work and — feo PESIEEE IPH ey)
travel. Typically, you will have an office but also regularly OR anager
work in mene depending on the type of social work Intern — Project Associate —» Project
you specialize in. Manager
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Social
Work.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Jamia Milia Islamia, New Delhi
2. The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda,
Vadodara, Gujarat
3. Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh
4. University of Delhi, New Delhi
5. Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh
6. Visva Bharati University, Shantiniketan,West Bengal
7. University of Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
8. Utkal University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD Gg
before applying) _ ; ;
1. Christ University Bangalore, Bengaluru, Karnataka Priti Patkar, is the co-founder and Executive
2. Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai, Secretary of the NGO, Prerana, working to end
Mielnerreche tive intergenerational trafficking and protect rights of
3. National Institute of Medical Sciences, Jaipur, children. Priti is a graduate from the School of
Rajasthan Social Work at Nirmala Niketan, College of Social
4. CMR University, Bengaluru, Karnataka Work. She stood first in her specialisation in Social
5. Semesnell Vidyapith Tonk. Rajasthan Work from the Tata Institute of Social Sciences in
6. St Xaviers College, Kolkata, West Bengal 1986. She created ‘Night Care Centre’ for the
7. Bosco Institute, Jorhat. Assam safety of children living in the brothel area which is
8. Nirmala Niketan, Mumbai, Maharashtra the first of its kind in the world. In 1989, she
‘ received the Ashoka Fellowship from the Ashoka
Information on the institute rankings can be found Foundation USA. She is also the recipient of the
at - hitps://www.nirfindia. org/Rankings/2023/Ranking html in ohielal Pefs.cer, ettroneleal bynes “Hestelen GL
ndia.
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) Source: htips://forum.thenudge.org/speakers
/ priti-patkar
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains
784

A Sports Lawyer is a legal professional who specializes in handling legal matters related to sports, athletes, teams, and
organizations. They provide advice, draft contracts, negotiate deals, and represent clients in legal disputes within the
sports industry.
Bar Ay
PERSONALITY TRAITS WW.
et =~
¢ You enjoy sports. ~ y
- You are an excellent communicator. foo UU
« You like to speak up for the right cause. 7
+ You like trying to help people solve their problems. Wao x }
| FEES | COURSE FEE
SCHOLARSHIPS C, The approx. course fee ranges between
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit INR 17,550 - 3,00,000
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there ‘These figures are estimated numbers and
are Central Government Schemes offered by will vary from Institute to Institute.
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes =
based on merit’ [=4, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
soot of these scholarships can vary from 1. Complete 10+2 in any stream
2. Pursue a 5-year L.L.B. course and then either
LOANS apply for L.L.M. or PGDM in Sports Law
3. If you choose to pursue L.L.M. in Sports Law
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a abroad, you will need to take English
portal for students seeking education loan. This Language Tests such as IELTS or TOEFL
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low OS
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, |
Bihar, etc. "| EXPECTED INCOME
j “These figures are indicative and subject to change
« All banks give education loans.
i The approx. salary of a Sports Lawyer
i ranges between INR 1,06,376 — 1,90,480°
i per month.
Source: https:;//www.salaryexpert.com/salar | oe
1 ycalculator non
Q v8

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Law firms, Athletic Associations, Law or EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7"
Entertainment Organizations.
Law Intern — Advocate — Senior
Work Environment: You will work in an office set up. Advocate
Travel is part of the job profile. You may expect to work
beyond court-hours, which is usually 5 or 6 days a week
and 7 or 8 hours every day. This may vary from court to _
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field. u
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY? 4 ny
The course is offered by the Department of Law. rs
This list of institutes is indicative only
A
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTE
1. National Law University Jodhpur, Rajasthan
2. Netaji Subhas National Institute of Sports,Patiala, Punjab
3. University of Mumbai, Maharashtra
4. Guru Nanak Dev University, Amritsar, Punjab
5. National Acadamy Of Legal Studies & Research University, Hyderabad, Telangana
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
1. Indian School of Business and Finance , New Delhi
2. Symbiosis Law School, Pune, Maharashtra
3. Indian Institute of Sports Management, Mumbai, Maharashtra
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD Go
Raghavendra Patnaik, a National Law School of India University (NLSIU) graduate is presently the managing director
at FairPlay Management Private Limited. Before this, he co-founded CornerStone
Sport and Entertainment Pvt. Ltd. and prior to that he was the legal advisor at the Mahesh Bhupathi run Globosport.”
Source: htips;//www.lawctopus.com/raghavendra-patnaik-sports-law-career/
“The above information is for training purposes only and will not be used for any commercial gains
786

An Unarmed Security Guard is a professional responsible for maintaining safety and security in various settings, such
as buildings, facilities, events, or properties, without carrying any weapons. They focus on non-violent security
measures to prevent theft, vandalism, or other illegal activities.
Bar
OURSE FEE
PERSONALITY TRAITS W. Fees | ©
—=A,_ The approx. course fee ranges between
« You are physically fit. Y INR 1,000 - 15,000*
+ You like to help others. .
« You pay attention to details while working. URES LSPS Gio HINTS Cle
; P ; will vary from Institute to Institute.
+ You like to have clear instructions to follow.
=! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
SCHOLARSHIPS Qhvrceteseteee teeter eeteneeeeess
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit Certificate
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there Complete 10+2 in any stream (preferably with a focus
are Central Government Schemes offered by on physical education or vocational
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and training).
State Schemes’
Diploma
Diploma in Security Management. These are offered by
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes various vocational training institutes
based on merit” and polytechnics.
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Undergraduate
time to time) Bachelor of Arts (BA) in Security Management,
Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.) in Crime and
LOANS Security Management.
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Postgraduate
portal for students seeking education loan. This Master of Arts (MA) in Security and Risk Management,
portal has been developed under the guidance of Master of Science (M.Sc.) in Security
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Studies or Criminal Justice.
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
BSSOCIaTION (IBA). Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
» All banks give education loans. fe
| Qe-) EXPECTED INCOME
I ‘These figures are taken from NCS and are indicative
and subject to change !
3 The approx. salary of an Unarmed Security
| Guard ranges between INR 9,000 - 15,000°
} i per month
\
on | Source - https;//bit.ly/3ZfaXzK
Rab ok one
Qi 787

Helper Guard — Security Guard >
Security supervisor

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

]. Central Industrial Security Force , Hyderabad, Chennai, Mumbai, Maharashtra

2. National Industrial Security Academy, Hyderabad,Telangana

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

1. Security Sector Skill Development Council , New Delhi, Mumbai, Banglore, Chennai, Kolkata, West Bengal

2. International Institute of Security & Safety Managment, New Delhi, Mumbai, Maharashtra
25-year-old Anil Kumar Warkade hails from
Khamaria, a small village in Tehsil-Rithi , Katni
District of Madhya Pradesh. Man Kumar, father of
Anil Kumar was a farmer. Anil Kumar successfully
cleared his Class 12 exams, after which he learned
about a course in the ‘Security’ domain. Anil Kumar
cleared the Security Guard course with an
impressive record. A Few days after completing his
Security Guard course, Anil Kumar received a job
offer as a ‘Security Guard’ in Katni . He accepted
a modest starting salary of INR 4,500 per month,
and went about his work with great zeal and
commitment. His Security Officer was impressed
with Anil Kumar for the dedication and hard work
that he showed while working. He quickly rose in
the organisation and now, to the pride of his

a a parents, his salary has increased manyfold.*
Source - https;//www.dbtech.in/SuccessStory
.aspx?StoryID=BOkQA V2WRbgQO/tT6Nv8duNXxX0x
LS HUX ILD/bMLUDI25ESce:
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
788 - not be used for any commercial gains

Research and 2 \
Developement f Ze
> aS

2 gf [ED
Ses
pot! ? DS -
3 Ow AS)
ie

Coy
2 #2
Oe PER)
aoe ae
pot! f SS
142°)

Anthropologist is interested in studying the origins, cultures, customs, and connections humans have with one another.
They look at how people interact with each other, their environment, and the artifacts they create to understand why
humans behave the way they do. They study these areas by researching, collecting, and evaluating information of
humankind. They may focus on a specific area of interest within the field, such as cultural anthropology or
archaeology. They use scientific methods to gather data about human cultures which includes observing social
interactions, interviewing participants, and analyzing artifacts found at excavation sites.
9 A
S bd
ss \
¢

« National Scholarship Portal - Visit

www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there

are Central Government Schemes offered by

different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and

State Schemes”

UGC Scholarships- Visit https://ugcnet.nta.ac.in/

to pursue higher education in various disciplines

enrolled in UGC-recognized universities in India.

S EB EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY

ICSSR Fellowships- Visit https://icssr.org/ support eee

research in social sciences, providing financial 1. Complete 10 + 2 in Humanities stream.

assistance for doctoral, postdoctoral, and research 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Arts (B.A.) in

projects. Anthropology followed by Master's degree in the

same, and then complete PhD in
. Anthropology.

¢ Scholarships are also available in the Institutes OR Poros

based on merit” C lete Bachelor's d B.A/BSc.) in Social

‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from ompiete Pachelors degree (B.A/B. c.) In 20cla

time to time) Sciences/Humanities, followed Master's degree in

the same, and then complete PhD in Anthropology.

; Vidya Lakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi. co.in, isa Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.

portal for students seeking education loan. This

portal has been developed under the guidance of

the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of

Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks

Association (IBA). ‘el

« Some states have student credit cards with low

interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,

Bihar, etc.

- All banks give education loans.

Dee eee eee ee

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Indian Anthropological Survey, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
Research Institutes, Publishing Houses,
Non-Governmental Organizations, Museums. Trainee > Anthropologist, Cultural > Senior
Anthropologist = Head of Department
Work Environment: There may be opportunities to
work in offices, laboratories, or engage in fieldwork.
Fieldwork may require extended periods of travel.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is conducted by the Department of Anthropology.
This list of institutions is for illustrative purposes only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Ranchi College, Ranchi, Jharkhand, Bihar
2. Arya Vidyapeeth College, Guwahati, Assam
3. Dibrugarh Hanumanbux Surajmall Kanoi College, Dibrugarh, Assam
4. North-Eastern Hill University, Meghalaya
5. Guru Ghasidas Central University, Chhattisgarh
6. Shia PG College, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
PRIVATE INSTITUTES Dr. Madhumala Chattopadhyay is an Indian
(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC anthropologist who specializes in the
before applying) indigenous people of the Andaman and
1. NIMS University, Jaipur, Rajasthan Nicobar Islands. In 1991, Chattopadhyay and
i } her colleagues were the first outsiders to
2. St. Xavier's College, Mumbai, Maharashtra establish peaceful contact with the Sentinalese
3. Devbhumi Uttarakhand University, Dehradun, Uttrakhand people. After completing her studies, she
4. Symbiosis School of Liberal Arts, Pune, Maharashtra felicel tie Mubhiepoleelcel Survey ey |lnele
— ; (A.N.S.I.) as a researcher and later as a senior
5. Ashoka University, Sonipat, Haryana fellow. Recalling her first field visit, Madhumala
6. Narsingh Datt College, Howrah, West Bengal says, "When | first went to the Andaman and
7. Kalinga Institute of Social Sciences, Bhubaneswar, Odisha Nicobar Islands, the people were very friendly.
| spent three months there and tried to learn
their language. They would show gestures like
Information on Institute rankings is available at - ‘Do you need water?! and | would respond with
; wey. ; gestures. Gradually, | learned important words
https://www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html and phrases. Then | returned to Port Blair and
analyzed the collected data."
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
; , ; ; ; Source -
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) httos://www.ndtv.com/india-news/woman-anthrop
ologist-madhumala-chattopadhyay-made-first-frien
dly-contact-with-andamans-sentinelese-t- 1958313
“The above information is for training purposes only and
will not be used for any commercial gains
792

Archaeologist studies human history, especially the culture of historic and prehistoric people in particular, through
discovery and exploration of ancient art, architectural relics, monuments and other materials. An Archaeologist
undertakes fieldwork, excavation of sites to seek answers concerning the social habits, customs, religious practices,
living conditions, etc.
ah 2 7)
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
UGC Scholarships- Visit https://ugcnet.nta.ac.in/
to pursue higher education in various disciplines [= EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
enrolled in UGC-recognized universities in India. A] veccccscsccecncneascneneaneenss
ICSSR Fellowships- Visit https://icssr.org/ support I. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream, preferably
research in social sciences, providing financial Humanities. ; ;
assistance for doctoral, postdoctoral, and research 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Arts (B.A.) in
projects. History/ Archaeology followed by Master’s degree
in Arts (M.A.) in Archaeology, and then complete
PhD in a related subject.
¢ Scholarships are also available in the Institutes OR
based on merit’ Complete Bachelor's degree in Arts (B.A.) in
Hist Archaeol foll
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Gn, ory/ renaeorogy © owed by Post
‘ : raduate Diploma in Archaeology.
time to time)
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
- VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of Ga
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
- All banks give education loans. _
ee

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Private and Government EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ae
Colleges/Universities, Museums, Cultural Centres, Field Assistant, Junior Archaeologist,
Ministry of Information and Broadcasting. Assistant Professor —>Field Archaeologist,
Project Archaeologist,— Senior
Work Environment: You are expected to work outdoors Archaeologist, Research Director — Chief
during field work or in an office environment when Archaeologist, Professor
writing reports or research papers. You may work full
time or part time, on individual field work projects, or in
a freelance capacity.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of History/Archaeology
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat
2. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Government Degree College, Allahabad,
Uttar Pradesh
3. DVA Degree College, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh
4. Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, Amarkantak, Madhya Pradesh
5. University of Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
6. University of Calcutta, Kolkata, West Bengal
7. University of Lucknow, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
8. University of Mysore, Mysore, Karnataka
PRIVATE INSTITUTES EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC . . : :
before applying) Nayanjot Lahiri is a historian and archaeologist of
1. B.K. College of Arts Science and Commerce, ancient India and a professor of history at Ashoka
Thane, Maharashtra University. She was educated at St. Stephen's
2. Institute of Archaeology, Archaeological Survey of College, Delhi, and at the Department of History,
India (ASI), New Delhi University of Delhi. She taught at Hindu College
3. Delhi Institute of Heritage Research and and thereafter at the Department of History
Management, New Delhi (University of Delhi) till 2015. She has served as
4. Deccan College Postgraduate And Research Dean of Colleges at the University of Delhi from
Institute, Pune, Maharashtra 2007 till 2010 and as Dean of International
5. Janardan Rai Nagar Rajasthan Vidyapeeth Relations from 2006 till 2007. She was previously
University, Udaipur, Rajasthan on the faculty of the department of history at the
University of Delhi. She is the winner of the 2013
Information on Institute rankings is available at - Infosys Prize, in the humanities, for her work in
https;//www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html archaeology and the 2016 awardee of the John F.
Richards prize for her book Ashoka in Ancient
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE India.”
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
Source - https://www.ashoka.edu.in/profile/
nayanjot-lahiri/
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
794 not be used for any commercial gains

Astrophysicists are scientists who specialize in studying space, stars, planets, and the universe. Their responsibilities
include analysis of data and statistics, archiving, plotting, logging, evaluating and reporting the results of the research.
They may have to coordinate data received from various satellites and telescopes, and use theoretical models to
compare this data and align images.
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
INSPIRE Fellowship- Visit
https://www.online-inspire.gov.in/ scholarship is =) EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
provided by the Department of Science & ES se ceeeceeeeeeeeeeeeaneneeeeeeee
Technology. 1. Complete 10+2 in Science (Physics, Chemistry
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)- Visit and Maths)
https://www.pmrf.in/ for research in STEM fields. 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Sc.) in
Physics.
OR
Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Master's degree (M.Sc.) and Ph.D. in Astronomy
based on merit’ and Astrophysics.
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
time to time)
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of eo;
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
« All banks give education loans. oe
wee ee ee ee Oe.

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Public and Private Research and EXPECTED GROWTH PATH f~/
Observation Centres.
Junior Researcher — Astrophysicist >
Work Environment: It is not a desk job. You will not handle Head of Department
a team. Local travel is a part of this job role. Part-time
work and contractual jobs may be available.
Organizations usually work for 5 to 6 days a week and 8
to 9 hours every day. This may vary from organization to
organization. Shift system may be available.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of ( ®
Physics/Astrophysics. _
This list of institutes is indicative only ©) > > * > j
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES @ 3 ““ :
1. Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, Karnataka 352),
2. National Institute of Technology, Rourkela, Odisha FA Ws }
3. Osmania University, Hyderabad, Telangana
4. Punjabi University, Patiala, Punjab
5. Indian Institute of Technology, Indore, Madhya Pradesh DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
6. Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, Maharashtra Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
7. St Xavier's College, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
8. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
9. Any recognised University in India
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying)
1. Loyola College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Mar Ivanios College, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala
3. St Joseph's College, Bengaluru, Karnataka
4. PSG College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
5. KJ Somatya College of Science and Commerce,
Mumbai, Maharashtra EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
6. Dr DY Patil Arts Commerce and Science College, Annapurni Subramaniam is currently the direc-
Pune, Maharashtra . tor at Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore.
7.3 Thomas College, Thrissur, Kerala She has a BSc and MSc from Calicut University.
8. St Teresa's College, Ernakulam Kerala She completed her PhD at IIA, Bangalore. She is
. oo, . known for her work in areas like star clusters,
Information on the institute rankings can be found at star formation, galactic structure, stellar popula-
- https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html tion in galaxies and Megellanic clouds".
Source: https://www.iiap.res.in/IIA50/sites /de-
fault/files/Women-Astronomers-llA.pdf
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains
796

Botanist studies plants and is primarily concerned with research into their structure, properties, and biochemical pro-
cesses. They use this knowledge to develop and promote environmental protection programs, improve plant growing
techniques and identify and extract plant products used in medicines, food, fabrics and other products.
Ay...
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
INSPIRE Fellowship- Visit
https://www.online-inspire.gov.in/ scholarship is (=! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
provided by the Department of Science & ~Q vecccccseseceeseeseseneeseneenes
Technology. 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)- Visit (Physics, Chemistry and Biology)
https://www.pmrf.in/ for research in STEM fields. 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Sc.) in
Botany.
OR
Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Master's degree in the same or related
based on merit” subject.
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
time to time)
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Ga
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc. _
« All banks give education loans. Lee eee eee eee
797

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Private Research Laboratories, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7"
Biotechnology Firms, Pharmaceutical Companies,
Colleges and Universities, Chemical Industry among Trainee — Botanist — Senior Botanist —
others Lead Researcher
Work Environment: The job requires physical activity.
You need not handle a team. Local travel is a part of
this job role. Part-time work and contractual jobs are
available. Organizations usually work for 5 to 6 days a
week and 9 to 10 hours every day. This may vary from
organization to organization
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Botany. This list of
institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. St Xavier's College, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
2. Hindu College, New Delhi
3. Government Arts College, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
4, Farook College, Kozhikode, Kerala
5. Osmania University College For Women,
Hyderabad, Telangana
6. Maharaja's College, Ernakulam, Kerala
7. Government Holkar Science College, Indore,
Madhya Pradesh
8. Scottish Church College, Kolkata, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if the Institute is affiliated and accredited with EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
UGC before applying)
Janaki Ammal is a well-known Botanist. Her work
1. Fergusson College, Pune, Maharashtra primarily focused on cytogenetics,
2. Mount Carmel College, Bangalore, Karnataka phytogeography, and plant breedings. She
3. PSG College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu obtained an Honours degree in Botany from the
4, Ramnarain Ruia College, Mumbai, Maharashtra Presidency College and then moved to the
5. Mar lvanios College, Nalanchira, Kerala University of Michigan in 1924, obtaining a Master's
6. Sir Parashurambhau College, Pune, Maharashtra degree in Botany in 1926 on a Barbour Scholarship.
7. St Joseph's College, Bangalore, Karnataka She received the Padma Shri in 1977, and was
8. K J Somaiya College of Science and Commerce, Mumbai, credited for her efforts in improving indigenous
Maharashtra sugarcane variety. She also helped in the analysis
of the geographical distribution of sugarcane
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - across the country. Ammal lived and worked in the
https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html Centre's Field Laboratory at Maduravoyal until her
death in February 1984."
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) Source: https://www.thefamouspeople.com
/ indian-botanists.php
798
‘The above information is for training purposes only and will not
be used for any commercial gains

A Child Development Specialist is an expert in identifying the traits, symptoms, and patterns particular to children
who suffer from various developmental and psychological disorders. They evaluate their educational needs and
issues. They give advice to parents and educators accordingly.
px @
©
I
4)
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and =] EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
State Schemes” ES vievseeeseneeeseateneeeatenaes
. . . 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream.
UGC Scholarships- Visit https://ugcnet.nta.ac.in/ 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Arts (B.A.) in Early
to pursue higher education in various disciplines Childhood Education/Child Development.
enrolled in UGC-recognized universities in India. /Child Psychology followed by Master's degree in Arts
. . . (M.A.) in Child Development or related field.
ICSSR Fellowships- Visit https://icssr.org/ support OR
research in social sciences, providing financial Complete Bachelor's in Arts (B.A.) in Early Childhood
assistance for doctoral, postdoctoral, and research Education/Child Development/
projects. Child Psychology followed by Master's degree in Arts
(M.A.) in Child Development or related field, and then
. . . . complete PhD in Child Development or related field.
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes OR
based on merit Complete Diploma in Early Childhood.
_ ; Education followed by P.G. Diploma in Early Childhood
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Education
time to time)
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of io"
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
« All banks give education loans.
eee eee ee ee 199

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Preschool or Elementary School, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ww?
Private or Government Agencies and Institutions, NGOs, Proaram Coordinator — Program
Public and Private schools, Child Care Centers, Head gran g
; Specialist — Program Manager —
Start programs, Family Child Care Homes, Social . : .
; . ; Assistant Director — Associate Director
Service Agencies, Hospitals, Clinics, Private Practices.
Work Environment: You are likely to in a variety of
settings depending on where you are employed. You
may work full time or part time, and some may work
evenings or weekends. You will typically work with
children from birth to age 5, or may work with
school-age children, adolescents, and families.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Early Childhood Care and Development
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Centre for Early Childhood Education and Development, Ambedkar University,
New Delhi
2. Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal
3. Lady Irwin College, New Delhi
4. Centre for Early Childhood Development and Research, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi
5. University of Delhi, New Delhi
6. St. Teresa's College, Kochi, Kerala
7. Maharaja Sayaqjirao University of Baroda, Vadodara,
Gujarat
| EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
PRIVATE INSTITUTES Dr. Monimalika Dey is an Associate Professor at
(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC the School of Education Studies (SES) Ambedkar
before applying) University Delhi. She completed her Ph.D. from the
1. Azim Premji University, Bengaluru, Karnataka Universi .
ene . niversity of Maryland. She has been involved in
2. Bombay Teachers! Training College, Mumbai, Maharashtra . ;
. . . ; several research projects to improve
3. Jaipur National University, Jaipur, Rajasthan ;
. ar . developmental outcomes of young children from
4. Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh ar sy: .
' marginalised communities, through parenting
. ; ar . programmes and preschool education. She began
Information on Institute rankings is available at - ‘
hits: “find '2023/Rankina html her career in Kolkata at Calcutta Rescue and was
SPONGY DiinsRENCL OEY. /iseliaenou instrumental in setting up a drop in center for 300
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE children, who lived with their families on the streets.
Indira Gandhi National O Uni ty (IGNOU Later, she took up a part time position at Manovikas
inelire: Grell Nettcinell Ofgem Currey | ) Kendra and helped establish a hospital based
programme for young children with disabilities.”
Source - https;//aud.ac.in/faculty/dr-
monimalika-day
“The above information is for training purposes only and will not
be used for any commercial gains
800

Criminology is the study of crime and deviant behaviour. It deals with understanding the root cause of the crime and
its effective prevention. A Criminologist studies crime and society's response to crime. They conduct research and
investigations, collect and analyze qualitative and quantitative data surrounding crime, ultimately providing insights
and solutions to prevent crime in a community. Criminologists work closely with the police and policymakers to offer
suggestions on policing strategies and proactive policing.
—_
NEY “a
28 Ce pa
ne , iit
A
i
fee SS
<=
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
UGC Scholarships- Visit https://ugcnet.nta.ac.in/
to pursue higher education in various disciplines
enrolled in UGC-recognized universities in India.
5 [=I EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
ICSSR Fellowships- Visit https://icssr.org/ support (OE
research in social sciences, providing financial 1c lete 10 +21 :
assistance for doctoral, postdoctoral, and research “omprete i ein any sirgam. .
projects. 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Arts (B.A.) in
Criminology.
3.Master’s degree in Criminology.
- Scholarships are also available in the Institutes 4. PhD in Criminal Justice.
based on merit”
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from
time to time)
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a len
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, _
Bihar, etc. oe
- All banks give education loans. eee
801

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: NGO's, Investigation Agencies, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ww
Projects for BPR&D and UNDP. _ : .
Intern — Criminologist > Senior
Work Environment: You will typically work in an office SANs
environment, but might travel occasionally.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Criminology/Sociology
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Maharaja's College, University of Mysore, Mysore, Karnataka
2. Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University, New Delhi
3. Patna University, Patna, Bihar
4. Karnataka University, Dharwad, Karnataka
5. Sardar Patel University of Police, Security and Criminal Justice, Jodhpur,
Rajasthan
6. University of Lucknow, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
7. National Forensic Sciences University, Gandhinagar, Gujarat
8. Bangalore University, Bengaluru, Karnataka
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC before applying)
1. Karuna Institute of Technology and Sciences, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
2. Institute of Research Technology and Management,
Thane, Maharashtra
3. Mansarovar Global University, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
4. William Carey University, Shillong, Meghalaya c —
5, Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj University, Navi Mumbai, Professor R Rochin Chandra is Director, Center
Maharashtra for Criminology & Public Policy, where he works as
6. Lloyd Law College, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh Chief Criminologist. Before this, he was working
7. Acharya Institute of Graduate Studies with the Rajasthan Prisons Department on an
; Bangalore, Karnataka ’ ex-cadre post. While there, he was responsible for
. ’ . . training and capacity building of correctional
8. OP. Jindal Global University, Sonepat, Haryana officials, and reviewing the prison rehabilitation
Information on Institute rankings is available at - Policies.Rochin has also worked with the Counter
https;//www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html Trafficking Group (Colorado, US), International
Justice Mission (Chennai), South Asian Society of
Criminology & Victimology, Tata Institute of Social
Sciences and UNICEF on key policy issues.”
Source: http;//ccppindia.org/people/
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains
802

Curators keep and maintain collections for institutions including museums, universities, or government facilities and
tend to the various items and many types of objects found within their collections, which could be items including
historical artifacts, sports memorabilia, or works of art. As preservationists, Curators care for important items,
documents, and entire collections that include historical transcripts, artwork, photography, and other important
historical or artistic things.
Cx):
—
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
UGC Scholarships- Visit https;//ugenet.nta.ac.in/
to pursue higher education in various disciplines =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
enrolled in UGC-recognized universities in India. AOD cecccccceecceeeereeeeeteenaaeees
ICSSR Fellowships- Visit https;//icssr.org/ support 1. Complete 10 + 2 in Humanities with History as a
research in social sciences, providing financial subject. ; ; ;
assistance for doctoral, postdoctoral, and research 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Arts (B.A.) in
projects. History/Fine Arts/Archaeology followed by
Master's degree in Arts (M.A.) in Archaeology or
related field.
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes OR
based on merit’ Complete Bachelor's degree in Arts (B.A.) in
Hist Fine Arts/Archaeol foll
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Bie ory/ nee s/ rengeo'ogy TO owed by PG
‘ iploma in Curational Studies.
time to time)
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, |s a
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Fa
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
- All banks give education loans. os
e e ° e e e e ° e e e 803

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Museums, Galleries, Universities, or any
organization that has a valuable collection requiring EXPECTED GROWTH PATH py”
care by someone with expertise in a particular field.
Helper — Archivist > Curator (Museum)
Work Environment: You will typically work full time, and — Head Curator
at times, you may work more than 40 hours per week to
meet deadlines or to coordinate with other museum
staff. You may also travel to attend professional
meetings, conferences, and workshops or to conduct
research.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the departments of History/Museology/Archaeology
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. University of Calcutta, Kolkata, West Bengal
2. Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh
3. Jiwaji University, Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh
4, Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat
5. National Museum Institute, New Delhi
6. University of Delhi, New Delhi
7. Sir JJ School of Art, Mumbai, Maharashtra
8. Institute of Archaeology, Archaeological Survey of India, New Delhi
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC before applying)
1. St. Xavier's College, Ranchi, Jharkhand
2. Madras Christian College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
3. Fergusson College, Pune, Maharashtra
4. St. Xavier's College, Kolkata, West Bengal EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
5. Christ University, Bangaluru, Karnataka : . .
6. Banasthali Vidvapith, Jai Rajasthan Tasneem Zakaria Mehta is an art historian,
yapitn, Jaipur, rajasina ; _.
7. Andhra Loyola College, Vijaywada, Andhra Pradesh cUfaior, Gesigney, dite! eolioal Genvist, Menta
8. Wilson College, Mumbai, Maharashtra studied English literature at Delhi University,
followed by a fine arts degree from Sir JJ School of
Inf . : a : Art, Mumbai, and a Master's in liberal arts from
nformation on Institute rankings is available at - , wer ;
hitps://www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html Columbia University, New York. She is the
Managing Trustee and Honorary Director of Dr.
Bhau Daji Lad Museum, Mumbai. It was her efforts
that transformed Mumbai's Dr Bhau Daji Lad
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE Museum into one of the country’s most buzzy and
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) contemporary spaces for Indian art."
Source - hitps;//www.education.artindiamag
.com
804 “The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains

Cytology is the branch of biology that deals with the structure, function, multiplication, pathology, and life history of
cells. A cytologist is one who specializes in cytology.
C)
, = [
d

« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’
INSPIRE Fellowship- Visit
https://www.online-inspire.gov.in/ scholarship is
provided by the Department of Science &
Technology. [Ft EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)- 1. Complete 10 + 2 in Science stream (Physics,
Visit https://www.pmrf.in/ for research in STEM Chemistry and Biology)
fields. 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (BSc) in

Biology/Life Sciences or related subject.
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes OR /
yeaa om Rare Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a

Master's degree and PhD in the same or
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from related field.
time to time)

Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of le"
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
- All banks give education loans. _

805 °°

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?

Places of Work: Colleges and Universities, Research

Laboratories, Pathology Laboratories, Food WT

Production Companies, Agricultural Research EXPECTED GROWTH PATH v7

Agencies and Firms among others. Trainee — Cytologist + Senior Cytologist —

: : / Lead Researcher

Work Environment: It requires physical activity.

Local travel is a part of this job role. Part-time work

and contractual jobs are available. Organizations

usually work for 5 to 6 days a week and 9 to 10

hours every day. This may vary from organization to

organization Shift system may be available.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

The course is offered by the Department of Life Science.

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Miranda House, New Delhi

2. Hansraj College, New Delhi

3. Loyola College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

4. Presidency College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

5. St Joseph's College, Bangalore, karnataka

6. Nizam College, Hyderabad, Telangana

7. Jai Hind College, Mumbai, Maharashtra

8. National Institute of Technology, Rourkela, Odisha

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC before applying)

1. St. Xavier's College, Mumbai, Maharashtra

2.Women's Christian College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

3. Shivaji College, New Delhi

4. Indore Public School Academy, Indore, Madhya Pradesh EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD CY

5. Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh Professor Arun Kumar Sharma was an eminent

6. MES College of Arts, Commerce & Science, Bangaluru, Karnataka scientist and the founder programme

7. Rabindranath Tagore University, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh coordinator of the University Grant Commission

8. Dr. CV. Raman University, Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh Centre of Advanced Study in Cell and
Chromosome Research in University of Calcutta.

Information on the institute rankings can be found An acclaimed cytogeneticist, Sharma had

at - https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html several distinguished professional honours to his
credit including the Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar

DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE Prize of the Council of Scientific and Industrial

Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) Research and the third highest civilian Award
Padma Bhushan.”
Source: https;//link.springer.com/article/
10.1007/s 13237-0 1 7-0226-3

806 “The above information is for training purposes only and will

not be used for any commercial gains

« You like to pay attention to details while working » Diploma: INR10,000 to 75,000 per year.
« You are comfortable communicating with others + Bachelor Degree: INR 20,000 and 2,00,000 per year
¢ You like to analyse problems/ situations « Postgraduate Degree: INR 40,000 to 5,00,000 per
« You are comfortable working with a team year.
Certificate
Eligibility: 10th or 12th grade
Duration: 6 months to 1 year.
Examples: Data Collection and Analysis, Certificate in Market
Research, Certificate in Statistical Data Collection
Diploma
Eligibility: Completion of 12th grade (or equivalent)
Duration:1 to 2 years.
Examples: Diploma in Data Science, Diploma in Research
Methodology, Diploma in Data Management and Analysis
Undergraduate
Eligibility: Completion of 12th grade (or equivalent) with a
focus on science, commerce, or social sciences
Duration:3 years.
Examples: Bachelor of Arts in Statistics, Bachelor of Science
in Computer Science, Bachelor of Commerce with a focus on
Data Management
Postgraduate
Eligibility:Bachelor’s degree (statistics, computer science,
economics, or commerce.
Duration: 1 to 2 years.
Examples: Master of Science in Statistics, Master of Computer
Applications , Master of Arts in Economics with a focus on
data analysis
Doctoral
Eligibility: Master's degree (statistics, data science, or
economics.
Duration: 3 to 5 years.
Examples: Ph.D. in Statistics, Ph.D. in Data Science or Big Data
Analytics, Ph.D. in Social Science Research and Data Analysis
Short-Term Courses: Data Entry, Short-term course in
Statistical Analysis Tools , Online courses in Data Collection
Methods
e = ——
Y ‘These figures are taken from NCS and are indicative
A ili and subject to change
- = The approx. salary of a Data Collector/
—— Field Survey Enumerator ranges between
INR 10,250 - 17,000* per month.
Source - Attps;//www.ambitionbox.com/
profile/enumerator-salary
807

Assistant Data Collector/ Field Survey
Enumerator — Data Collector/ Fleld Survey
Enumerator — Field Analyst — Lead
Enumerator
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. University of Delhi, New Delhi
2. Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai, Maharashtra
3. Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi
A. University of Mumbai, Maharashtra
5. Any recognised University in India
Shaila Mahalamani is a 39-year-old woman from
Belgaum in North Karnataka who works in
Bangalore as an enumerator for Good Business
Lab (GBL). Her role involves working in the field
and conducting surveys to help generate data for
research. She has worked at GBL for the last four
years, but her career started nearly 18 years ago,
after her daughter was born. At the age of 17, she
was married off to an older man who expected
her to sit at home and manage the house. She
didn't want her daughter's life to go the same way
whom she wanted to enrol in an English medium
school and have a good future. Initially she worked
as a teacher in a local school, and later took on
the role of an enumerator. Under the pressure of
her family, she left her job and tried her hand at
stitching before deciding to rejoin as an
enumerator. She moved to Bangalore and has
been working there ever since. She then got
SN promoted from an enumerator to a field analyst,
S l and now works on two to three projects at a time.’
we ; ( Source - idronline.org/features/gender/one-
“ survey-at-a-time-the-challenges-of-being-a-wom
SS / N ; an-enumerator/
PASS \ *The above information is for training purposes only and will
S not be used for any commercial gains
\ SS
808 XY S
WSs
@

Demography Is the science of populations. Demographers seek to understand population dynamics by investigating
three main demographic processes: birth, migration, and aging (including death). Most of the discipline’s research
focuses on humans, but there is for example the specialized field of biodemography, too.
=
ee, ae
)
wy )
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’
UGC Scholarships- Visit https://ugcnet.nta.ac.in/
to pursue higher education in various disciplines
enrolled in UGC-recognized universities in India. ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
ICSSR Fellowships- Visit https://icssr.org/ support 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream.
research in social sciences, providing financial 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (BA/BSc) in
assistance for doctoral, postdoctoral, and research Population Studi
rojects. Opu ation tudies or Demography/Anthropology/
P Sociology/Statistics/Economics or Social Sciences.
OR
¢ Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
based on merit” Master's degree (MSc/MA) and PhD in the same or
related field.
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from
time to time) Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
¢ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This 'o"
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc. oe
- All banks give education loans. _
809

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Environmental Protection Agencies, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH f~/
Census Bureau, Market Research Organizations, Private
Manufacturing Companies etc. Intern — Junior Demographer —
. ; ; Demographer — Senior Demographer
Work Environment: Local travel is a part of the job role.
Part-time work and contractual jobs may be available.
Organizations usually work for 5 to 6 days a week and 8
to 9 hours every day. This may vary from organization to
organization. Shift system may be available. You may have
to put in extra hours when the need arises.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
a
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY? pa nO 0 = v
« ] A
if A Be | aH:
The course is offered by Department of : Ki ent ry ll Ro
Population Studies. 6 i? BB ome
Loauperne De, WT A fl ° ll i) e
This list of institutes is indicative only Au By | 1 oe A a fi
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES Ni ne a Lh a | o
1. Barkatullah University, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh 5 hk: ery i adh, Ke) A,
2. Gurucharan University, Silchar, Assam A I. i fl | ll 1
3. Annamalai University,Chidambaram, Tamil Nadu fl -- lid dl = old so
4. University of Lucknow, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh a o- Z TW : 1 fl
5. Sri Venkateswara University, Tirupati,Andhra Pradesh fn ‘iI i Il ae W
6. Rani Durgavati Vishwavidyalaya, Jabalpur, Madhya Pradesh nh e
7. Vikram University, Ujjain, Madhya Pradesh “ I
8. Fakir Mohan College, Balasore, Odisha
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if the Institute is affiliated and
accredited with UGC before applying)
1. Gujarat Vidyapith, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
2. Salipur Autonomous College, Cuttack, Odisha EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
3. Ekamra College, Bhubaneswar, Odisha .
4. Dehradun Institute of Technology, Dehradun Uttarakhand Professor P.M. Kulkarni is a Demographer and a
retired professor of Population studies at JNU
Information on Institute rankings is available at - University, New Delhi. He obtained his PhD degree
https;//www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html in Statistics from the Colorado State University and
was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Brown University.
He has served on advisory committees of the
Census of India, various Universities, Research
Institutes, Government Departments, and
International Organizations.”
Source: https;//www.asianpa.org/ 1 04-
biosketches/258-purushottam-m-kulkarni.html
*The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains
810

Ecologists study the relationship between plants, animals and their environment. The aim of their work could range
from balancing the needs of the environment to coming up with ideas for land management. As an ecologist, you
would normally specialise in a particular type of environment, for example marine or coastal areas, or a specific
animal or plant species.

« National Scholarship Portal - Visit

www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there

are Central Government Schemes offered by

different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and

State Schemes”

UGC Scholarships- Visit https://ugcenet.nta.ac.in/

to pursue higher education in various disciplines =

enrolled in UGC-recognized universities in India. =© EDUCATIONAL . PATHWAY

ICSSR Fellowships- Visit https://icssr.org/ support 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,

research in social sciences, providing financial Chemistry and Biology)

assistance for doctoral, postdoctoral, and research 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (BSc) in Life

projects. Sciences/Biology or any other related subject.

OR
; ; ; ; Complete Bachelor's degree followed by a Master's

. Scholarships are also available in the Institutes degree (MSc) in Ecology or a related field.

based on merit

(Evailatotliy au ES sonclenslys can vary Were Please check the duration of the course during enrolment

time to time)

¢ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, \s a

portal for students seeking education loan. This

portal has been developed under the guidance of Ga

the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of

Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks

Association (IBA).

« Some states have student credit cards with low

interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, _

Bihar, etc. i

- All banks give education loans. Peers sss

811

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?

Places of Work: Research organizations, Forest

Departments, Agricultural Research Departments and EXPECTED GROWTH PATH I”

Centres and others.
Intern — Junior Ecologist — Ecologist —>

Work Environment: It is not a desk job. You are likely Senior Ecologist > Head of the

to handle a team of junior ecologists. Local travel is a Department

part of the job role. Part-time work and contractual

jobs may be available. Organizations and institutes

usually work for 5 to 6 days a week and 9 to 10 hours

every day. This may vary from organization to

organization. Shift system may be available.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This course is offered by the Department of Agricultural Sciences.

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Assam University, Silchar, Assam

2. University of Rajasthan, Jaipur, Rajasthan

3. Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh

4. University of Delhi, New Delhi

5. Annamalai University, Chidambaram, Tamil Nadu

6. University of Calcutta, West Bengal

7. Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka

8. University of Agricultural Sciences, Dharwad, Karnataka

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC before applying)

1. Hindustan Institute of Technology and Science, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

2. Veermata Jijabai Technological Institute, Mumbai, Maharashtra

3. Singhania University, Jnunjhunu, Rajasthan

4. Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J

5. St. Xavier's College, Ahmedabad, Gujarat Kartik Shanker is an ecologist and a

6. College Of Engineering, Pune, Maharashtra professor at Indian Institute of Science

7. Sri Ramaswamy Memorial (SRM) University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu Bangalore. He is the author of the book Soup to

8. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka Superstar: The Story of Sea Turtle Conservation

. , ; along the Indian Coast. He has done his

Information on the institute rankings can be found Bachelor's and Master's in

at - https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html Zoology from Madras Christian College and
University of Madras, respectively, and PhD from
IISc on small mammals.
Source: https:;//nanopdf.com/download/
on-sea-turtles-centre-for-ecological-scienc-
es_paf
“The above information is for training purposes only and will

gD not be used for any commercial gains

Economists study people and their choices to understand why they make certain decisions. They have a thorough
understanding of how the economy works. The role of an economist includes giving economical and financial advice
to businesses, companies, brands or even the government. They are also responsible for evaluating the company’s
business stance and give strategy suggestions keeping in mind economic outlook. They guide governments and
organisations in making financial decisions in order to improve the country's economy.
Le
D
\
VM \
\
- National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
UGC Scholarships- Visit https://ugenet.nta.ac.in/
to pursue higher education in various disciplines =
enrolled in UGC-recognized universities in India. ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
ICSSR Fellowships- Visit https://icssr.org/ support 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream (preferably
research in social sciences, providing financial Commerce) with Mathematics as a subject
assistance for doctoral, postdoctoral, and research 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Arts (B.A.) in
projects. Economics, followed by a Master's degree in
Economics and then complete a PhD in the same or
¢ Scholarships are also available in the Institutes ested discipline.
based on merit , .
Complete a Bachelor's degree in
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Management Studies (BMS)/Business
time to time) Administration (BBA) in Economics followed by a
Master's degree in Business Administration (MBA) in
Business Economics.
¢ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks ie"
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
- All banks give education loans.
813

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?

Places of Work: Government and Private Banks, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH sy”

Finance Companies, Global Firms, Government and Assistant Economist — Economist —

Private Colleges/Universities, NGOs, Government and Chief Economist

Private Companies OR

Work Environment: You will typically work en noms ~ Economist —

independently in an office. You are likely to collaborate

with other economists and statisticians, sometimes

working with teams. You may be required to travel as

part of the job.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

The course is offered by the Department of Economics

This list of institutes is indicative only.

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Miranda House, University of Delhi, New Delhi

2. Shri Ram College of Commerce, New Delhi

3. Hindu College, New Delhi

4. Lady Brabourne College, Kolkata, West Bengal

5. New College Institute of Management, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

6. Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal

7. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi

8. Delhi School of Economics, New Delhi

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC before applying)

1. Fergusson College, Pune, Maharashtra

2. Loyola College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

3. St. Xavier's College, Kolkata, West Bengal

4. St. Andrews College of Arts Science and Commerce, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66

Mumbai, Maharashtra Gita Gopinath is one of the top names among

5. PSG College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu women economists worldwide. She is the first

6. Rani Birla Girls’ College, Kolkata, West Bengal Economist to be serving as managing director of

7. St. Joseph's College, Bengaluru, Karnataka the International Monetary Fund (IMF) since

8. Jyoti Nivas College, Bengaluru,Karnataka January 2022. Prior to this, she served as the chief
economist of IMF between 2019 and 2022. She

Information on Institute rankings is available at - completed her bachelors from Lady Shri Ram

Pin TMI REMO MGA SeTabs ate AO / Sete hi abt College, University of Delhi and went on to pursue
a master’s from Delhi School of Economics.”

DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE

Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) Source: httos;//www.shethepeople.tv/
shestars/five-indian-women-economists
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains

814

Engineering Physicists work to combine Engineering, Physics, and Math in an effort to bridge the gap
between theoretical science and practical engineering.They use scientific and engineering principles to solve prob-
lems and develop new processes, products and technologies.
e
ou
\ =
« Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship - | |
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
« Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the [= EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees © vrrrereereeeeeereteeteeteeeneey
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this 1. Complete 10+2 in Science stream ( Physics,
scheme: Chemistry and Mathematics)
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers }
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Tech/B.E./B.Sc)
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The in Mathematics/Chemistry/
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical Physics
disabilities, women and students from North East and OR
J&K." Complete Bachelor’s degree (B.Tech/B.E./B.Sc) in
- National Scholarship Portal - Visit Mathematics/Chemistry/
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are Physics, followed by a Master's degree in the same
Central Government schemes offered by different field.
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes. For admissions, you must qualify entrance
« Scholarships are also available in institutes based on . . .
merit” examination conducted at national level (JEE Main,
“(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) JEE Advanced etc.) or state level (WBJEE, AP
EAMCET etc.) or institute level (VET, IP etc.)
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian Ga
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website.
+ Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
+ All banks give education loans.
815

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH fr”
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY? } .
The course is offered by the Department of Engineering/Physics. am
This list of institutes is indicative only. \ xX
\
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Delhi Technological University, New Delhi \
2. The Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra
3. IIT Delhi, New Delhi
4. IT Guwahati, Guwahati, Assam
5. IIT Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
6. National Institute of Technology Calicut, Kozhikode, Kerala
7. Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology,
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala
8. IIT BHU, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Chandigarh University, Chandigarh
2. Sri Chandrasekharendra Saraswathi Viswa Mahavidyalaya,
Kanchipuram, Tamil Nadu
3. Vidyavardhaka College of Engineering, Mysore, Karnataka
4. Bennett University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh
5. RKDF University, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66 |
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html
816

An English Literature Scholar is involved in the study of texts from around the world, written in the English language or
languages translated into English.
%
Py
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
UGC Scholarships- Visit https://ugenet.nta.ac.in/ EB EDUCATIONAL . P ATHWAY
to pursue higher education in various disciplines ;
enrolled in UGC-recognized universities in India. 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream.
2. Complete Bachelor’s degree in English
ICSSR Fellowships- Visit https://icssr.org/ support Literature/Comparative Literature, followed by
research in social sciences, providing financial Master's degree in the same discipline.
assistance for doctoral, postdoctoral, and research OR
projects. Complete Bachelor's degree in English.
Literature/Comparative Literature, followed by
. . . . Master's degree in the same discipline, and then
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes lete a PhD in Enalish Literature/C +i
based on merit" complete a in English Literature/Comparative
Literature.
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
time to time)
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a le.
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
- Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc. oe
+ All banks give education loans. _
817

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Media Houses, Advertisement
Agencies, PR Consultancies, Content Creation EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ~”
Agencies English Literature Student — English
_ Literature Scholar
Work Environment: The work timings are typically 5
to 6 days a week for 8 to 9 hours
per day. Shift system is applicable.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of English.
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Presidency College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. St. Xavier's College, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
3. Hindu College, New Delhi
4. St. Stephen's College, New Delhi
5. Hansraj College, New Delhi
6. Scottish Church College, Kolkata, West Bengal
7. Jadavpur University, Kolkata, West Bengal
8. Delhi College of Arts and Commerce, New Delhi
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC and NCTE before applying)
1. Loyola College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Fergusson College, Pune, Maharashtra
3. Symbiosis College of Arts and Commerce, Pune, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 6
Maharashtra 7, ; ;
4. Mount Carmel College, Bengaluru, Karnataka Madhumita Biswas is an Assistant Professor
5. St. Xavier's College, Kolkata, West Bengal with the Department of English, Jhargram Raj
6. Lady Shri Ram College for Women, New Delhi College (Gils WHiing)), Ste an English
7. Sri Krishna Arts and Science College, Coimbatore, Literature graduate and Says, | have always
Tamil Nadu enjoyed studying English literature as it gave
8. Hindusthan College of Arts & Science, Coimbatore, me access is understanding the world better.
Tamil Nadu Literature, | believe, teaches us empathy, more
than anything. Not only are we able to learn
about the world and its affairs better by trying
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE to identify with them. Students with a literature
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) background find it much easier to ace
competitive examinations and interviews as
well."”
Source: Personal interview
“The above information is for training purposes only and
sis will not be used for any commercial gains.

Epigraphy is the study of inscriptions or epigraphs carved into hard materials such as stone or cast in metal. It provides
data about the past. In India, inscriptions on temple walls are common.
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
UGC Scholarships- Visit https:;//ugenet.nta.ac.in/ —
to pursue higher education in various disciplines ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
enrolled in UGC-recognized universities in India. eee’
_ 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream.
ICSSR Fellowships- Visit https://icssr.org/ support 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (BA) in
research in social sciences, providing financial History/Art History/ Archaeology/Epigraphy or
ceed for doctoral, postdoctoral, and research any related subject.
OR
Complete a Diploma in History/Art History/
- Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Archaeology/Epigraphy or any related.
based on merit” OR
Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Master's (MA/PG Diploma) and PhD degrees in
time to time) the same or related field.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Ga
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
« All banks give education loans. _
cee e eee ges

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Private and Government Colleges and EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ~/
Universities, Museums, Cultural Organizations or Societies,
Research Organizations etc Junior Researcher — Epigraphist >
Senior Epigraphist
Work Environment: It is not a desk job. Local travel is a
part of this job role. Part-time work and contractual jobs
may be available. Organizations usually work for 5 to 6
days a week and 8 to 9 hours every day. This may vary
from organization to organization. You are likely to put in
extra hours as and when the need arises.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of History/Archaeology.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat
2. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Government Degree College, Prayagraj, Uttar
Pradesh
3. DAV Degree College, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh
4. Indira Gandhi National Tribal University, Amarkantak, Madhya Pradesh
5. University of Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
6. University of Calcutta, Kolkata, West Bengal
7. University of Lucknow, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
8. University of Mysore, Mysore, Karnataka
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying)
1. B.K. College of Arts, Science and Commerce, Thane, Maharashtra
2. Institute of Archaeology, Archaeological Survey of India, New Delhi
3. Delhi Institute of Heritage Research and Management,
New Delhi
4. Deccan College Postgraduate and Research Institute, EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
Pune, Maharashtra Dr. K.V. Ramesh was an eminent Epigraphist and
9. Janardan Rai Nagar Rajasthan Vidyapeeth University, former Joint Director-General of Archaeological
Udaipur, Rajasthan Survey of India (ASI). Ramesh had a Master’s
6. Jagadguru Rambhadracharya Divyanga University, degree in Sanskrit language and literature from
Chitrakoot, Uttar Pradesh ; Madras University and a Doctorate from
7. SBET Institute of Management and Technology, Mohali, Karnataka University, Dharwad. He was awarded
Unite . . “Honour of Excellence” by then Prime Minister of
8. Uma Arts & Nathiba Commerce Mahila College, India, Manmohan Singh, in recognition of his
Gandhinagar, Gujarat tye ee .
contribution to the field of Epigraphy, in 2011. He
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - preps] ehinteyy Meas
https://www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html Sakae hiifee/J/rorneudinny eoncccemn/enationle
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE epigraphist-dr-k-v-ramesh-passes-away
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) _ _
“The above information is for training purposes only and will not
820 be used for any commercial gains

Forensic Scientists examine and analyse evidence from crime scenes. Their objective findings assist in the investiga-
tion and prosecution of perpetrators of crime.
A® IN
“te
mr es
&
= x
PATI! wl day,
———
* National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www-scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
=! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
INSPIRE Fellowship- Visit ES beveeeeceeeeaeeeeeeceeeeaneeeees
https://www.online-inspire.gov.in/ scholarship is . .
provided by the Department of Science & I. Complete 1042 n the Science stream
Technology. (Physics, Chemistry, Biology)
2. Complete a Bachelor’s degree (B.Sc.) in
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)- Forensic Science.
Visit https://www.pmrf.in/ for research in STEM OR
fields. Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
Master's degree in the same or allied field.
OR
. Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Complete MBBS and follow it up with an M.D. in
based on merit F . .
orensic Medicine.
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from You might have to clear competitive exams such
time to time) as All India Forensic Science Entrance Test or
NEET to get admission into your choice of course.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). eo”
+ Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
+ All banks give education loans.
rarer |!

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?

Places of Work: Universities, Museums, Research EXPECTED GROWTH PATH s7

Institutions, Central or State Laboratories Ssaiesie Seaiiet— Ciemtet—. Samer
Scientist — Principal Scientist

Work Environment: You will work both indoor and OR

outdoor. You might have to visit crime scenes. While Adjunct Scientist + Senior Scientist >

you may not head a team, you will work in a team. You Laboratory Manager

are likely to work 6 days a week and 8 to 10 hours oe : Sci Technici

: at rainee — Forensic Science Technician >

every day. This may vary from organization to Forensic Science Head

organization.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This course is offered by the Department of

Forensic Science.

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

]. Jamia Hamdard University, New Delhi

2. Mahatma Gandhi University, Kottayam,Kerala

3. Mumbai University, Mumbai, Maharashtra

4. Chandigarh University, Chandigarh

5. Sam Higginbottom University of Agriculture, Technology and Sciences, Prayagraj, Uttar Pradesh

6. Rashtrasant Tukadoji Maharaj Nagpur, Maharashtra

7. Guru Ghasidas Vishwavidyalaya, Bilaspur, Chhattisgarh

8. Maulana Abul Kalam Azad University of Technology, Kolkata, West Bengal

9. Any recognised University in India

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited

with UGC before applying)

1. Kristu Jayanti College, Bengaluru, Karnataka

2. Manipal Academy of Higher Education, ManipalKarnatoka © EXAMPLE FROMTHE FIELD [J

3. JSS Academy of Higher Education & Research,

Mysore, Karnataka Gaurav Gupta is the first Indian to earn a

4. Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat Doctorate in Digital Forensics. He was bestowed

5. Amity University, Noida, Uttar Pradesh with the Young Scientist Award of the Indian

6. Kalasalingam Academy of Research and Science Congress in 2010 by APJ Abdul Kalam.

Education, Krishnankoil, Tamil Nadu Besides serving as an additional director with the

7. Karunya Institute of Technology and Sciences, Ministry of Electronics and Information

Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu Technology (MeitY), Gupta is also a published

8. Rabindranath Tagore University, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh writer. He has a Ph.D. in Digital Forensic to Detect
and Fix Computer Frauds and Cyber Crimes from

Information on the institute rankings can be found Jadavpur University, West Bengal. Currently, he is

at - https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking. html ona mission to create awareness about
technological fraud in society.”
Source: https;//analyticsindiamag.com/
talking-cyber-awareness-with-dr-gaurav
-gupta-of-meity-first-indian-to-earn-doctorate-in
-digital-forensics/

822 ‘The above information is for training purposes only and will

not be used for any commercial gains

Genetic Engineers make changes to the genes of a living thing. Genes are tiny units, which carry
information about an organism. They make up the material called DNA, which is found in the cells of every living thing.
This process of gene modification is called Genetic Engineering.
\H
ZN
a
— 7 So)
oN
« Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship -
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the ’
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
- Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About 20,000
such engineering scholarships are awarded by the
Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course fees
of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under this
scheme. ~
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship- The IOC Ltd offers
300 scholarships every year to eligible students. Students
need to be enrolled in an undergraduate course. The =] EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
scholarship particularly focuses on students with physical ES esssesuceascussenscesssussovenasesussoscensesusenscsnceanensccseseneces
disabilities, women and students from North East and :
Jak" 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit Chemistry and Maths/Biology)
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there are 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree in Genetics/Life
Central Government schemes offered by different Science/Biotechnology/ Biological
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes.” Science/ Genetic Engineering.
¢ Scholarships are also available in institutes based on OR
merit.’ Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
“(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) oo s degree in the same or related field.
Complete 10+2 in the Science stream, pursue
MBBS and then do an MD in Medical Genetics,
- VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for Clinical Genomics, Bio-Physics, etc.
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website. Gi
+ Some States have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
+ All banks give education loans.
Pras (.7)).)

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
EXPECTED GROWTH PATH fr”
NY,
Z7
ZZ .

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY? LI 4A e

P <7 °o
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering. « * YN
This list of institutes is indicative only. > ~~
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka
2. Aryabhatta Knowledge University, Patna, Bihar
3. Madurai Kamarqj University, Maduraim, Tamil Nadu
A. Indian Institute Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal
5. Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, Chennai Tamil Nadu
6. Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati, Assam
7. AWH Special College, Calicut, Kozhikode, Kerala
8. University of Delhi, New Delhi
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. SRM of Institute of Science and Technology, Kattankulathur, Tamil Nadu
2. Bharath Institute of Higher Education and Research, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
3. Sharda University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh
4. Lovely Professional University, Jalandhar, Punjab XAM 66
5. Shoolini University, Bajhol, Himachal Pradesh 7 SASS h A Ul ey
6. Asian International University, Manipur, Karnataka
7. Merit International Institute of Technology, Tamil Nadu
8. International Institute of Management and Technical

Studies, Bangalore, Karnataka
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.htm!
824

Geographer studies the Earth and its land, features, its inhabitants and how they interact with their surrounding. With
extensive knowledge of natural phenomena, they identify patterns and make predictions about how different natural
events and human behaviors can impact ecosystems, including the atmosphere surrounding Earth, bodies of water
and the habitats of animals and plants. The two main types of geographers are human geographers and physical
geographers. Geographers use several technologies in their work, such as GIS, remote sensing, and global
positioning systems (GPS).
fee =
We SS
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes’
= EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
to pursue higher education in various disciplines . .
enrolled in UGC-recognized universities in India. 1. Complete 10 + 2 inany stream with
Geography as a subject.
ICSSR Fellowships- Visit https://icssr.org/ support 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Geography
research in social sciences, providing financial /Earth Sciences (B.A,/B.Sc.) followed by
assistance for doctoral, postdoctoral, and research Master's degree in Cartography/Urban and Town
projects. Planning/Regional Planning/Physiography/
Climatology.
OR
¢ Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Complete Bachelor's degree in Geography/
based on merit Earth Sciences (B.A./B.Sc.) followed by
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Mester s degree n Cartography/Urban and Town
: anning/Regional Planning/Physiography/
time to time) : .
Climatology and then complete PhD in a relevant
subject.
+ VidyaLakshmi, www. vidyalakshmi.co. in, is a Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of eo.
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
« All banks give education loans. e
e e e ° e e e e e e e 825

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?

Places of Work: State/Local Government, Architectural EXPECTED GROWTH PATH sp”

eine, Seine ane Firms, Schools, Colleges, Research Surveying and Mapping Technician — Pro-

nemmenns: fessional Land Surveyor — GIS

Work Environment: You may have to travel to do aaa ~ Survey Manager — Vice Pres'-

fieldwork. You may travel to foreign countries or remote OR

locations to gather data and observe geographic Cartographic Technician — GIS Specialist >

features, such as the landscape and environment. ; ;

GIS Supervisor — Survey Manager — Vice

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field President

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

The course is offered by the Department of Geography

This list of institutes is indicative only.

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Miranda House College, New Delhi

2. Dayanand Anglo Vaidik Mahavidyalaya, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh

3. Presidency College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

4. Mohammedan Anglo Oriental College, New Delhi

5. Gokhale Memorial Girls College, Kolkata, West Bengal

6. Bihar National College, Patna, Bihar

7. Lady Brabourne College, Kolkata, West Bengal

8. Nizam College, Hyderabad, Telangana

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC

before applying)

1. Symbiosis College of Arts and Commerce, Pune, Maharashtra

2. National Institute of Medical Sciences, Jaipur, Rajasthan EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66

3. Shri Harivallabhdas Kalidas College, Ahmedabad, Gujarat .

4. Noida International University, Greater Noida, Uttar Pradesh Anu Kapur is Professor of Geography, Delhi

5. Dr APJ Abdul Kalam University, Indore, Madhya Pradesh School of Economics, University of Delhi, India. She

6. Fergusson College, Pune, Maharashtra is a Fellow at the Indian Institute of Advanced

7. St. Xavier's College, Ranchi, Jhatkhand Studies, Shimla, India and Senior Fellow at the

8. Madras Christian College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu Nehru Memorial Museum and Library, New Delhi.
She is a recipient of the Amartya Sen Award in

Information on Institute rankings is available at - 2012 for Distinguished Social Scientists, Indian

httos;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html Council of Social Science Research, New Delhi.
Her areas of interest are geography in India and

DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE geography of India. She had studied Geography in

Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) her both undergraduate and postgraduate
program and then completed her PhD in the same
field."
Source - hitps://sites.google.com/geography
.du.ac.in/web/people/faculty-members/prof-anu-
kapur
“The above information is for training purposes only and will

826 not be used for any commercial gains

A Geologist is an expert in the field of geology, the study of the Earth. They work to understand the history of the
planet we live on, to better predict the future, and to explain current occurrences. Geologists are also hired to survey
land and draw up safe building plans.
EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
Certificate
+ National Scholarship Portal - Visit Eligibility: Class 12 with a science background.
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there Duration: 6 months to 1 year.
are Central Government Schemes offered by Examples: Certificate in Geology
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and Diol , ,
State Schemes” iproma . .
INSPIRE Fellowship- Visit Eligibility: Class 12 with science
https://www.online-inspire.gov.in/ scholarship is Duration: 1 to 2 years.
provided by the Department of Science & Examples: Diploma in Geology.
Technology. Undergraduate
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)- Eligibility: Class 12 with science
Visit https://www.pmrt.in/ for research in STEM Duration: 3 years for B.Sc. programs; 4 years for
fields. B.Tech. programs.
. Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Examples: B.Sc. in Geology, B.Sc. (Hons.) in Geology
psBee on merit . Postgraduate
(Availability of these scholarships can vary from ve ' . .
time to time) Eligibility: Bachelor's degree in Geology, Earth Sci-
ences, or a related field with at least 55% marks.
Duration: 2 years.
Examples: M.Sc. in Geology.
¢ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Doctoral
portal for students seeking education loan. This Eligibility: Master's degree in Geology.
portal has been developed under the guidance of Duration: 3 to 5 years.
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Examples: Ph.D. in Geology, Ph.D. in Earth Sciences
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks Short-Term Courses: Certificate in Geoinformatics.
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc. e”
- All banks give education loans. a
» te eee eee
827

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Environmental Organizations, Natural EXPECTED GROWTH PATH fp?
Science Museums, Environmental Protection Agencies,
Regional and City Planning Agencies, among others Intern > Geologist > Senior Geologist >
Deputy Director of the Department —
Work Environment: It is not a desk job. You will not handle Director of the Department
a team. Local travel is a part of this job role. Part-time
work and contractual jobs may be available.
Organizations usually work for 5 to 6 days a week and 8
to 9 hours every day. This may vary from
organization-to-organization Shift system may be
available.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Geology or
Geological Sciences.
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
]. Government Arts College, Karur, Tamil Nadu
2. Government Arts College, Channai, Tamil Nadu
3. Alagappa Government Arts College, Karaikudi, Tamil Nadu
4. Center for Distance Learning and Continuing Education,
Chitrkut, Madhya Pradesh
5. Government Arts College, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
6. Government Arts College, Salem, Tamil Nadu
7. Government Arts College, Thiruvanaanthpuram, Kerala
8. Sri Pratap College, Srinagar, Jammu and Kashmir
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying)
1. Shri Guru Ram Rai PG College, Dehradun, Uttarakhand -« EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
2. A. Doraisany Nadar Maragathavalliammal College (ADM) Sudipta Sengupta is the first female Geologist from
for Women, Nagapattinam, Tamil Nadu . India to be working in the Antarctica. She is also the
3. AVS College of Arts and Science, Salem, Tamil Nadu only woman to be awarded a Shanti Swarup
4. Dayanand Brijendra Swarup PG College, Dehradun, Bhatnagar Prize in Earth Sciences. She did her
Utttarakhand B.Sc., M.Sc. and Ph.D. from Jadavpur University. She
5. Deogin College, Aurangabad, Maharastra worked as a Geologist in the Geological Survey of
6. Dr Palpu College of Arts and Science, Puthussery, Kerala india between 1970 and 1973. She then carried
7. Fergusson College, Pune, Maharastra out Post-Doctoral research work for the next three
8. Gossner College, Ranchi, Jharkhand years at the Imperial College, London. She has also
. , ; authored many best-selling books recounting her
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - travels.”
https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html ;
Source : https;//thelifeofscience.com/2020/
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE 1 1/17/sudipta-geologist/
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
‘The above information is for training purposes only and will not
be used for any commercial gains
828

A Historian studies past events using a wide range of sources such as written records, physical artifacts,
photographs, interviews, films, letters and other primary source documents. They collect information from these
sources to answer questions about what was happening in the past and why at a given time. They try to understand
how and why things change over time. History can be divided into three major specialisations — archaeology,
museology and archival studies.
ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit cenmeate 12¢ ‘zed board
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there igipl" Y: ass rom a recognized poare.
are Central Government Schemes offered by Duration: 6 months to 1 year. ; ; ;
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and Examples: Advanced Certificate in Ancient Indian
State Schemes” History, Certificate in Historical Studies.
UGC Scholarships- Visit https://ugenet.nta.ac.in/ Diploma
to pursue higher education in various disciplines Eligibility: Class 12 with a min. of 50% aggregate
enrolled in UGC-recognized universities in India. Duration: 1 to 2 years.
ICSSR Fellowships- Visit https://icssr.org/ support Examples: Diploma in Archaeology, Diploma in
research in social sciences, providing financial Museology.
oes, for doctoral, postdoctoral, and research Undergraduate
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Eligibility: Class 12 with a min. of 50% aggregate
Weeloainea Duration: 3 years.
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Examples: B.A. in History, B.A. in Ancient History.
time to time) Postgraduate
Eligibility: Bachelor's degree in History or a related
field with at least 50% marks.
; _ Duration: 2 years.
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, Isa Examples: M.A. in History, M.A. in Ancient Indian
portal for students seeking education loan. This History and Archaeology.
portal has been developed under the guidance of Doctoral
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Eliaibility: Master's dearee in History or a related
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks ugiouly, Masters deg 5 story oF a relate
Association (IBA). discipline with a minimum of 55% marks.
« Some states have student credit cards with low Duration: 3 to 5 years. ;
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Examples: Ph.D. in History, Ph.D. in Archaeology
Bihar, etc. Short-Term Courses: Certificate in Archival Studies.
+ All banks give education loans.
> a i
A
ye eS eo.
, }€ 829 °

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Research Firms, Museums, Universities, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH he
Public Sector Firms or Historical Societies, Media . ye
ve ‘ ‘ Assistant Professor — Historian >
Publishing Industry.
Professor
Work Environment: You are likely to spend most of your IK oa .
ee so. Research Intern — Historian — Senior
time in offices, classrooms, and libraries. Working hours Historian > Head of the Department
are flexible. You may have to travel to distant cities or
countries. You are expected to visit archives or historic
sites for research.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of History
This list of institutes Is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Sophia College for Women, Mumbai, Maharashtra
2. Bihar National College, Patna, Bihar
3. Lady Shri Ram College for Women,New Delhi
4. Presidency University, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Umiya Arts and Commerce College for Girls, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
6. Government Mahaprabhu Vallabhacharya Post Graduate College,
Mahasamund, Chhattisgarh
7. Silver Jubilee Government Degree College, Kurnool, Andhra Pradesh
8. Government Degree College, Baramulla, Jammu and Kashmir
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC before applying)
1. St. Xavier's College, Ranchi, Jharkhand
2. Madras Christian College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
3. Fergusson College, Pune, Maharashtra
4. St. Xavier's College, Kolkata, West Bengal EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
5. Christ University, Bengaluru, Karnataka Prachi Deshpande is an Indian historian and
6. Banasthali Vidyapith, Jaipur, Rajasthan Associate Professor in History at Centre for Studies
7. Andhra Loyola College, Vijayawada, Andhra Pradesh in Social Sciences, Calcutta. She did her graduation
8. Wilson College, Mumbai, Maharashtra from Fergusson College and post graduation from
JNU. She completed her PhD. from US. After
Information on Institute rankings is available at - working in US for a few years she returned to India
HES TR ara S AN eTmali ogy 202: / lets abit to join Centre for studies in Social Sciences, Kolkata.
She has written books specialising in the history of
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE ; western India. She received the Infosys award in
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) DODO) Carcleer ward
Source - https;//www.infosysprize.org/
laureates/2020/prachi-deshpande.html
‘The above information is for training purposes only and will not
830 be used for any commercial gains

A Mathematician is someone who is trained in the study of numbers and calculations. He or she uses this training to
analyze data to solve real-world problems in business, engineering, healthcare, or other fields.
CE a eb s(s-a)(s-b) (s-e)
LD R77 Nab
pase, MI
= ‘\ TX agehen
=—
Jab xearbre & oh,
wi
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www-.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
INSPIRE Fellowship- Visit
https://www.online-inspire.gov.in/ scholarship is =| EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
provided by the Department of Science & ES EDUCATIONAL PA
Technology.
MS 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)- (Physics, Chemistry and Maths)
Visit https://www.pmrt.in/ for research in STEM 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (BSc) in
fields. Mathematics
OR
Complete Bachelor's degree followed by a
¢ Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Master's degree (MSc) in the same or related
based on merit” field.
PI heck the durati f th duri I
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Base check the curation of the course during enrolment
time to time)
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Gi
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
- Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, cee
Bihar, etc eevee eee lle
- All banks give education loans. tee ee eee
831

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?

Places of Work: Universities, Colleges, Government EXPECTED GROWTH PATH fp"

and Private Research Centres among others _ ;
Intern —+ Mathematician — Senior

Work Environment: It is a desk job. You are likely to Mathematician — Head of the Department

work in a team. Organizations usually work for 5 to 6

days a week and 8 to 9 hours every day. This may

vary from organization to organization. Shift system

may be available. Overtime may be required.

Part-time work and contractual jobs may be

available.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This course is offered by the Department of Mathematics.

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Government Arts College, Karur, Tamil Nadu

2. Government Arts College, Ooty,Tamil Nadu \

3. Hindu College, New Delhi ‘

4. Government Arts College, Coimbatore, Odisha —- »Y g

5. University of Delhi, New Delhi

6. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh

7. Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur, Rajasthan

8. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, Uttar Prdesh \

9.Any recognised University in India Se

PRIVATE INSTITUTES =

(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC before applying) 4 A

]. Loyola College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

2. Mar Ivanios College, Thiruvananthapuram, Tamil Nadu

3. St Joseph's College, Bengaluru, Karnataka EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66

4. PSG College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore, Odisha

5. KJ Somaiya College of Science and Commerce, Professor Neena Gupta, a Mathematician at

Mumbai, Maharashtra the Indian Statistical Institute in Kolkata, received

6. Dr DY Patil Arts Commerce and Science College, the Ramanujan Prize for Young Mathematicians

Pune, Maharashtra in 2022. She did her

7. Presidency University, Kolkata, Tamil Nadu Bachelor's from Bethune College in 2006,

8. St Teresa's College, Ernakulam, Kerala post-graduation in Mathematics from the Indian
Statistical Institute in 2008, and

Information on the institute rankings can be found subsequently her Ph.D in 2011. She has also

at - https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html been the recipient of the 2022 Nari Shakti
Puraskar.”

DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE

Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) Source: dst.gov.in/professor-neena-gupta-re-
ceives-ramanuyjan-prize- young-mathematicians
‘The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains

832

Meteorology is part of the Earth Sciences that deals with the study of atmosphere in order to forecast weather
conditions. Meteorologists also study how the atmospheric and weather conditions affect the earth and Its people.
v. ”
- Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana Scholarship - en
This scholarship is provided to students enrolled in the first
year of their engineering undergraduate course. Eligibility
includes an aptitude test. It is awarded by the
Government of India for economically backward
students who have a strong aptitude for scientific
research.”
- Merit-cum-Means based Scholarship - About
20,000 such engineering scholarships are awarded by
the Ministry of Minority Affairs every year. The full course
fees of awardees is directly paid to their institutions under
Vinay =| EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
+ Indian Oil Educational Scholarship - The IOC Ltd = bisateneetsececseeeecnecuetenens
offers 300 scholarships every year to eligible students. . . .
Students need to be enrolled in an undergraduate I. Complete 10+2 in Science stream (Physics,
course. The scholarship particularly focuses on students Chemistry and Mathematics) .
with physical disabilities, women and students from North 2. Complete Bachelor's degree (B.Tech./B.Sc) in
East and J&K.” Meteorology
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit OR
www.scholarships.gov.in Under this portal there are Complete a Diploma in Meteorology
Central government schemes offered by different OR
departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and State Schemes” Complete Bachelor’s degree followed by a
- Visit www.buddy4study.com a gateway to Master’s degree in the same or allied field
scholarships starting from Class X\"
« Scholarships are also available in institutes based on . .
merit” For admissions, you. must qualify entrance
*(Availability of these scholarships vary from time to time) examination conducted at the national level
(JEE Main, JEE Advanced etc.) or State level
(WBJEE, AP EAMCET etc.) or Institute level (VET, IP
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a portal for etc.)
students seeking education loan. This portal has been
developed under the guidance of the Department of Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
Financial Services, (Ministry of Finance), Department of
Higher Education (Ministry of Education) and Indian
Banks Association (IBA). Students can view, apply and
track the education loan applications on the website. le”
- Some states have student credit cards with low interest
rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, Bihar, etc.
+ All banks give education loans.
PIDLIDDI iii

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
This course is offered by the Department of Engineering.
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
]. Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, West Bengal
2. Centre for Atmospheric and Oceanic Science, Indian Institute
of Science, Bengaluru, Karnataka
3. Andhra University, Visakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh co
4. Cochin University of Science and Technology, Kochi,
Kerala a ~>
5. Maharaja Sayaqjirao University of Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat & =
6. Shivaji University, Vidyanagar, Kolhapur, Maharashtra —
7. Indian Institute of Technology , New Delhi .3 =
8. Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology , Pune, Maharashtra —
PRIVATE INSTITUTES \\ =
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. Manipal Institute of Technology, Manipal, Karnataka A
2. University of Petroleum and Energy Studies, Dehradun,
Uttarakhand
3. NIIT University, Neemrana, Rajasthan EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
4. Jain University, Bengaluru, Karnataka
5. KL University, Vaddeswaram, Andhra Pradesh
6. Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
7. Rajalakshmi Engineering College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
8. ICFAI Foundation for Higher Education, Hyderabad,
Telangana
834

Museology is the science or profession of museum organization and management. Museologists look after, manage,
organize, display and develop museum collections, and conduct relevant research. Museum curators usually
specialize in a broad discipline, such as anthropology, art, decorative arts, natural history, social history, science, or
technology.
9
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes®
. . =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
UGC Scholarships- Visit https://ugenet.nta.ac.in/ ES EDUCATIONAL PA
to pursue higher education in various disciplines . . :
enrolled in UGC-recognized universities in India. 1. Complete 10 + 2 in humanities stream with
History as a subject.
ICSSR Fellowships- Visit https://icssr.org/ support 2. Complete Bachelor’s degree in History/
research in social sciences, providing financial Ancient Indian History and Archaeology or its
assistance for doctoral, postdoctoral, and research equivalent.
projects. 3. Complete Master’s degree in Museology
followed by a PhD in the same or relevant
discipline.
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes OR. ine
Pased on merit Complete Master’s degree in Ancient or
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Medieval Indian History/Archaeology/
time to time) Anthropology/ Geology with knowledge of the
Pleistocene era and then complete PG
Diploma course in Museology.
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). le.
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
+ All banks give education loans.
Dee ee ee 835

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Government-run/Private Museums. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH s/
Work Environment: You will typically work in an office Intern — Museologist— Senior Museologist
environment, but might travel occasionally.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of History/Archaeology/Museology
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Institute of Archaeology, Archaeological Survey of India, New Delhi
2. University of Calcutta, Kolkata, West Bengal
3. Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda, Vadodara, Gujarat
4. National Museum Institute of History of Art Conservation and Museology, New Delhi
5. Rabindra Bharati University, Kolkata, West Bengal
6. Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh
7. Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh
8. The Centre for Studies in Museology, University of Jammu, Jammu and Kashmir
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
w, Ratna Fabri was a noted museologist of India who
was awarded Padma Shri in 1970 in the Art field
bon | for her achievements. Ratna Fabri had studied
J museums in America and Europe and had
| displayed arrangements in the Indian pavilion in the
Pe, 7 pn > Montreal exhibition.”
“" a Source: https;//peoplepill.com/people/
= ratna-fabri
| * “The above information is for training purposes only and will
7 not be used for any commercial gains
=>
836 |

A nanoscientist meticulously manipulates atoms and molecules to create revolutionary materials. Their work spans
medicine, electronics, and energy, driving atomic-scale innovations, transforming technology, and pushing the bound-
aries of what's possible in science and engineering.
¥
a
wad
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes*
INSPIRE Fellowship- Visit
https://www.online-inspire.gov.in/ scholarship is
provided by the Department of Science & =| EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
Technology. [EQ EDUCATIONAL PA
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)- 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream
Visit https://www.pmrf.in/ for research in STEM (Physics, Chemistry and Maths)
fields. 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Sc.) in
Physics/Mathematics
OR
» Scholarships are also available in the Institutes 1.Complete a Bachelor's degree
osecrenmen 2.Master's degree (M.Sc.)
3. Ph.D. in Astronomy and Astrophysics/Applied
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Mathematics.
time to time)
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
- VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This Fa
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low :
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, °
Bihar, etc. Piiiiiiiiiin:
- All banks give education loans. ee
837

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?

Places of Work: Public and Private Research and EXPECTED GROWTH PATH yw”

Observatories. ;
Junior Researcher — Scientist — Head of

Work Environment: You have to work for at least 8 to Department

9 hours and for 5 to 6 days a week. Shift duties may

be there. Overtime is common.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

The course is offered by the Department of Mathematics/ Astrophysics.

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

]. Indian Institutes of Technology Bombay, Mumbai, Maharashtra

2. Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi

3. Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

A. Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh

5. Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, Kharagpur, West Bengal

6. Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee, Roorkee, Uttarakhand

7. Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, Karnataka

8. Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Bengaluru, Karnataka

9. Amity Institute of Nanotechnology, Noida, Uttar Pradesh

10. SRM Institute of Science and Technology, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

11. University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, Karnataka

12. Anna University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
Anuradha TK. is a retired Indian scientist and
project director of the Indian Space Research
Organisation (ISRO). She has worked on the
launches of the satellites GSAT-12 and GSAT-10.
She is the senior most female scientist at ISRO,
having joined the space agency in 1982, and
also the first woman to become a satellite
project director at ISRO. Born in Bengaluru, she
graduated with a bachelor's degree in
electronics from the University Visvesvaraya
College of Engineering in Bangalore.”
Source - indiatimes.com/trending/rocket-
women-isro-scientists-india-56 15 15.html?
picid=2243362
“The above information is for training purposes only and will

838 not be used for any commercial gains

A Paleontologist is a scientist who studies fossils. Paleontology Is the study of the history of life on Earth as reflected
in these fossil records. Fossils are the remains or traces of organisms (plants, animals, fungi, bacteria and other
single-celled living things) that lived in the geological past and are preserved in the crust of the Earth.
y #£
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
INSPIRE Fellowship- Visit
https://www.online-inspire.gov.in/ scholarship is
provided by the Department of Science &
Technology.
=! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)- Q vesseesesssesseesseesssseesesesssesssasssessesssenenieesessenseees
Wisi hitps://www pret in/ Hei IneSctele NEN 1. Complete 10+2 in Science stream (Physics,
: Chemistry and Biology)
2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Sc.) in
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Biology/Geology.
based on merit” OR
Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
Master's degree and Ph.D. in the same or related
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from subject.
time to time)
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This ie"
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
- Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
« All banks give education loans.
839 «

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Government and Private Research EXPECTED GROWTH PATH py?
Organizations, Environmental Organizations, Natural
Science Museums among others. Intern — Palaeontologist — Senior
Palaeontologist — Deputy Director of

Work Environment: It is not a desk job. You will not handle the Department — Director of the
a team. Local travel is a part of this job role. Part-time Department
work and contractual jobs may be available.
Organizations usually work for 5 to 6 days a week and 8
to 9 hours every day. This may vary from
organization-to-organization Shift system may be
available.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Geology or
Geological Sciences.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Government Arts College, Karur, Tamil Nadu
2. Government Arts College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
3. Alagappa Government Arts College, Karaikkudi,

Tamil Nadu
4. Center for Distance Learning and Continuing

Education, Chitrakoot Madhya Pradesh
5. Government Arts College, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
6. Government Arts College, Salem, Tamil Nadu
7. Government Arts College, Thiruvanampuram, Kerala
8. Sri Pratap College, Srinagar, Jammu and Kahshmir
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited with
UGC before applying)

EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J

1. Shri Guru Ram Rai PG College, Dehradun, Uttarakhand Devapriya Chattopadhyay, a Paleonto-
2. A. Doraisany Nadar Maragathavalliammal College Biological Researcher is one of the few Indian

for Women, Nagapattinam, Tamil Nadu wenn whe wewe prac © were nhe
3. AVS College of Arts and Science, Salem, Tamil Nadu paleontology community. She has produced
4. Dayanand Brijendra Swarup PG College, Dehradun, several research works throughout her career. She
Uttarakhand had done her B.Sc. in Geology from
5. Deogiri College, Aurangabad, Maharastra Jadavpur University, M.Sc. in Applied Geology from
6. Dr Palpu College of Arts and Science, Puthussery, Kerala IIT, Bombay, and Ph.D. from the University of
7. Fergusson College, Pune, Maharastra Michigan."
8. Gossner College, Ranchi, Jharkhand

; . ; Source: hitps://www.shethepeople.iv/news/-
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - meet-palaeontologist-devapriya-
httos;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.htm! chattopadhyay-indian-woman/
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE “The above information is for training purposes only and will not
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) be used for any commercial gains
840

A Physicist is a scientist specialized in the field of physics. His/her field of study includes the interactions
of matter and energy in the physical universe. Physicists plan and conduct scientific experiments to test
theories.
er
ere.
ll |
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
wwwscholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
INSPIRE Fellowship- Visit
https://www.online-inspire.gov.in/ scholarship is
provided by the Department of Science &
Technology. ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)- . ;
Visit https://www.pmrf.in/ for research in STEM I Complete 10+2 in the Science stream
Bac (Physics, Chemistry and Maths)
2. Complete Bachelor's degree (BSc) in
Physics.
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes OR
based on merit” 1. Complete Bachelor's degree (science/math).
2. Master's degree in physics.
— 3. PhD in the same or related field.
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from
time to time) Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This le"
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, .
Bihar, etc. .
« All banks give education loans. ee ee eee
841

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Research Laboratories, Electronics and EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ~7
Electrical Manufacturing Companies, Non-governmental ; _
Organizations, Colleges/Universities, Defence Sector and Junior Researcher — General Physicist/
oes Teacher — Head of Department
Work Environment: You will work in an office or
laboratory set up. You may handle a team. Local travel is
not a part of the job profile. Organizations usually work 5
or 6 days a week and 8 or 9 hours everyday, but this may
vary from organization to organization. Overtime may be
required. Part-time and contractual jobs may be
available.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field.
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Physics.
This list of institutes is indicative only DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
]. Presidency College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. St Xavier's College, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
3. Hindu College, New Delhi
4. Government Arts College, Coimbatore, Odisha
5. Farook College, Kozhikode, Kerala
6. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur , Uttar Pradesh
7. Indian Institute of Technology, Guwahati, Assam
8. Indian Institute of Technology, Jodhpur, Rajasthan
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying)
1. Loyola College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Mar Ivanios College, Thiruvananthapuram,Kerala
3. St Joseph's College, Bangalore,Karnataka
4. PSG College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
5. KJ Somaiya College of Science and Commerce,
Mumbai, Maharashtra
6. Dr DY Patil Arts Commerce and Science College, Set Sol ln SL (al
Pune, Maharashtra Indrani Bose is an Indian physicist, and senior
7. St Thomas College, Thrissur, Kerala professor at Department of Physics, Bose Insti-
8. St Teresa's College, Ernakulam,Kerala tute, Kolkata. Her fields of specialization are
theoretical condensed matter, quantum informa-
Information on the institute rankings can be found at tion theory, statistical physics, biological physics
- https://www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html and systems.”
Source: https://www.researchgate.net/pro-
file/Indrani-Bose
‘The above information is for training purposes only and will
842 not be used for any commercial gains

Political Scientist is a specialist who reads, understands and researches about the political discourse, government
policies, government steps, international relations between countries and local political issues. They research on
different policies and frameworks set up by the government, analyse the budget, election campaigns, election
manifesto, how voters/ public identifies with these policies, campaigns and manifestos.
Af
a

« National Scholarship Portal - Visit

www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there

are Central Government Schemes offered by

different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and

State Schemes’

UGC Scholarships- Visit https://ugcnet.nta.ac.in/

to pursue higher education in various disciplines [= EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY

enrolled in UGC-recognized universities in India. © veverereeereereteeeneeeseeteny

. .. . 1. Complete 10 + 2 in any stream

ICSSR Fellowships- Visit https://icssr.org/ support , . . :

research in social sciences, providing financial 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Arts in Political

assistance for doctoral, postdoctoral, and research Science. ; ; 7 ;

projects. 3.Master’s degree in Arts (M.A.) in Political science

4.PhD in Political science or related field.

« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Please check the duration of the course during enrolment

based on merit’

“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from

time to time) o

« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a

portal for students seeking education loan. This

portal has been developed under the guidance of

the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of

Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks

Association (IBA).

- Some states have student credit cards with low _—

interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, oe

Bihar, etc. eo «© © © © © © © © ew ew ew

¢ All banks give education loans.

843

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?

Places of Work: Central and State Government EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7

Agencies, Social Research Organizations. Assistant Professor — Political Scientist >

Work Environment: You will typically work full time in an Professor

. . . OR

office. You might sometimes work additional hours to a: ae : :

- Political Scientist — Advisor — Senior

finish reports and meet deadlines. .
Advisor

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

This course is offered by the Department of Political Science

This list of institutes is indicative only.

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi

2. Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh

3. University of Hyderabad, Hyderabad, Telangana

4. Jamia Millia Islamia University, New Delhi

5. University of Delhi, New Delhi

6. Tata Institute of Social Sciences, Mumbai, Maharashtra

7. University of Jammu, Jammu and Kashmir

8. Calcutta University, Kolkata, West Bengal

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC before applying)

1. St. Xavier’s College, Mumbai, Maharahtra

2. Christ University, Bangalore, Karnataka

3. Madras Christian College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

4. Fergusson College, Pune, Maharashtra EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD (a)

5. KJ Somaiya College of Arts & Commerce, Amita Singh is an Indian Political Scientist, currently

Mumbai, Maharashtra serving as a professor of Law and Governance at

6. Symbiosis College of Arts and Commerce, Pune, Maharashtra — Jawaharlal Nehru University, in Delhi, India. She is

7. Parul University, Vadodara,Guyjarat also a member of the Indian Council of Social

8. Banasthali Vidyapith, Jaipur, Rajasthan Science Research. Singh completed her higher
education with a Ph.D. in political science from Dr.

Information on Institute rankings is available at - Bhimrao Ambedkar University, in Agra, Uttar

https//www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking. html Pradesh. Singh also serves on a number of
government boards and committees in relation to

DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE administration and governance.She is currently the

Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) chair of the University's Soecial Center for Disaster
Research.”
Source - https://www.mel.edu/proflle/
amita-singh
“The above information is for training purposes only and will not
be used for any commercial gains

844

Scientific Assistants are the hands-on workers in scientific fields. The duty of a Scientific Assistant is to
provide support to the scientist or a team of researchers to conduct research, develop new products
and technologies.
®
\ I
4 o
| 4 ill ae
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
INSPIRE Fellowship- Visit ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
https://www.online-inspire.gov.in/ scholarship is —
provided by the Department of Science & 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream.
Technology. (Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics)
BSc a Viigeyte h Fellowship (PMRF) 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Sc.) in
rime Minister's Research Fellowship (F Physics/Computer Science/Information
Wit nttps://www.pmrtin/ sou Wosealreh I oI Technology/Computer Applications and then take
; the SSC IMD Scientific Assistant exam.
OR
- Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Complete a Diploma in Electronics and
based on merit* Telecommunication Engineering and then take the
SSC IMD Scientific Assistant exam.
OR
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
time to time) Master's degree (M.Sc) in the same or related
discipline and then take the SSC IMD
Scientific Assistant exam.
» VidyaLakshmi, www.vidy alakshmi.co.in, is a Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA). o”
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
- All banks give education loans.
wee eee ee ee se 845

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Indian Meteorological EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7
Department
Scientific Assistant — Scientific Senior
Work Environment: It is a desk job. You will not Assistant — Scientist Officer | > Scientist
head a team. Local travel is not a part of the job Officer Il — Scientist Officer III
profile. You will typically work 5 to 6 days a
week, 7 to 8 hours per day. Shift system may be
applicable
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Science.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. St. Stephen’s College, New Delhi
2. Hindu College, New Delhi
3. Miranda House, New Delhi
4. Madras Christian College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
5. Christ University, Bangalore, Karnataka
6. Government Arts College, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
7. Nizam College, Hyderabad, Telangana
8. Jai Hind College, Mumbai, Maharashtra
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC
and AICTE before applying)
]. Centurion University of Technology Management,
Bhubaneshwer, Odisha
2. Indus International University, Bathu, Himachal Pradesh
3. Periyar Maniammai Institute of Science and
Technology, Thanjavur, Tamil Nadu
A. Sri Chandrasekarendra Saraswathi Viswa Maha Vidyalaya,
Kanchipuram, Tamil Nadu EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
. Shri M ial i
5. Shri Ramaswamy emoria Institute of Science and Amol Veer works as a Scientific Assistant at
Technology, Kanchipuram, Tamil Nadu . .
ara . India Meteorological Department, Aurangabad.
6. Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat ; . .
He has a Bachelor's degree in Electronics &
7. St. Xaviers College, Kolkata, West Bengol ow. . .
Communication Engineering from MIT Aurangab-
8. Mount Carmel College, Bangaloru, Karnataka 2 .
ad and a Master's degree in Mechatronics from
the Indian Institute of Technology, Patna.”
Information on the institute rankings can be found at
. ge . Source: htips;//rocketreach.co/amol-veer-
- https; .nirfindia. 2 L
https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html email 224258022
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE Th _ . ;
. . . . . e above information is for training purposes only and will
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) not be used for any commercial gains
846

Seismologists are scientists, specialized in geophysics, who study the sudden, violent movements of the earth con-
nected with earthquakes. Seismologists study geological materials which can range from a laboratory sample to the
Earth as a whole, from its surface to its core.
ol ’
en B
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes*
INSPIRE Fellowship- Visit =
https://www.online-inspire.gov.in/ scholarship is EA EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY _
provided by the Department of Science &
Technology. 1. Complete 10 + 2 in the Science stream (Physics,
Chemistry, Biology)
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)- 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (BSc) in
Visit https://www.pmrf.in/ for research in STEM Geophysics, Geology and so on.
fields. OR
Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Sc.)
* Scholarships are also available in the Institutes fotowes oy 6 Master s degree (M.Sc.) in the same
based on merit” or related eld.
OR
Complete a Bachelor’s degree and Master's
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from degree followed by a Ph.D. in
time to time) Geography/Geology.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of Ga
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, tee
Bihar, etc. oe
- All banks give education loans. eee
847

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Research Institutes, Petroleum EXPECTED GROWTH PATH fp"
Industry, Geothermal power Industry, Nuclear
Research Centres and so on. Intern — Seisomology Researcher /Seis-
mologist — Senior Seismologist
Work Environment: You have to work for at least 8 to
9 hours and for 5 to 6 days a week. Shift duties may
be there. Overtime is common.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Geophysics.
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Government Arts College, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
2. Government Arts College, Ooty, Tamil Nadu
3. Government Arts College, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu
4. Government College, Kullu, Himachal Pradesh
5. Government Degree College, Lansdowne, Uttarakhand
6. Government Gandhi Memorial Science College, Jammu & Kashmir
7. Pachhunga University College, Aizawl, Mizoram
8. Sri Pratap College, Srinagar, Jammu & Kashmir
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC
before applying) 66
1. Parul Institute of Applied Sciences, Vadodara, Gujarat 2 ANAS nla Ae
2. Shri Guru Ram Rai PG College, Dehradun, Uttarakhand Kusala Rajendran is an Indian seismologist and
3. AVS College of Arts and Science, Salem, Tamil Nadu currently a professor at the Centre for Earth
4. Global Education and Managment Studies Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru,
Arts and Science College, Ramapuram, Kerala India. She has primarily worked on earthquakes
5. KJ Somaiya College of Science and Commerce, and their source mechanisms. She has
Mumbai, Maharashtra completed her Master of Technology in the field
6. Mahadev PG College, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh of Applied Geophysics from the Indian Institute
7. Baba Farid Institute of Technology Group of of Technology, Roorkee in 1979. She then
Institutions, Dehradun, Uttarakhand graduated from University of South Carolina,
8. Patkai Christian College, Dimapur, Nagaland USA with a Doctor of Philosophy in Seismology in
1992. In 2018, she received the first National
Information on the institute rankings can be found Award for Women Scientist for ‘Ocean Sciences
at - https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html and Technology’ and ‘Atmospheric Sciences
Technology’.
Source - timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/
bengaluru/bengaluru-seismologist-gets-
national-award/articleshow/64979459.cms
‘The above information is for training purposes only and will
848 not be used for any commercial gains

A Sociologist studies society, human behaviour and interaction that develop when people work together. Social
institutions, cultures and groups are examined by them. The subject matter for a Sociologist is diverse ranging from
crime, religion, social structures of family to the state, from the divisions of race and social class to the shared beliefs
of a common culture.
B @.
sf
= L& id
ewe
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
UGC Scholarships- Visit https://ugcenet.nta.ac.in/ =! ENTRY PATHWAY
to pursue higher education in various disciplines © orersesecressererseeseesseeenen
enrolled in UGC-recognized universities in India. 1. Complete 10 + 2 in Humanities stream
. . ; preferably with Sociology.
fooo8 Folleuel [ee Ve hitps://iessr.org/ else 2. Complete Bachelor's degree in Arts (B.A.) in
research in social sciences, providing financial S¢ iol fol d by Master's d . A '
assistance for doctoral, postdoctoral, and research oclology Tolowed by Masters degree in Aris
(M.A.) in the same.
projects.
OR
1.Complete Bachelor’s degree in Arts (B.A.) in
¢ Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Sociology
based on merit® 2. Master's degree in Arts (M.A.) in Sociology
3. PhD in the same subject.
*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from OR
time to time) Complete Bachelor’s degree in any Humanities
subject and then complete a PhD in Sociology.
- VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of 7
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
- Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
- All banks give education loans. a
rrr ye

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Research Organizations, Colleges, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH s”
Universities, Regional and Central Government, : : :
Coneulling Seiviee eS. Intern — Junior Analyst > Sociologist,
General — Senior Sociologist + Head of
Work Environment: You will typically work in an office. the Department
You may work outside of an office setting when
conducting research through interviews or observations
or presenting research results.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
The course is offered by the Department of Sociology
This list of institutes is indicative only.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Miranda House, University of Delhi, New Delhi
2. Lady Shri Ram College, University of Delhi, New Delhi
3. Hindu College, New Delhi
4. Lady Brabourne College, Kolkata, West Bengal
5. Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi
6. Delhi School of Economics, New Delhi
7. Centre for Studies in Social Sciences, Kolkata, West Bengal
8. Gujarat Arts and Science College, Ahmedabad, Gujarat
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC before applying)
1. Fergusson College, Pune, Maharashtra
2. Loyola College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
3. St. Xavier’s College, Kolkata, West Bengal
4. St. Andrews College of Arts Science and Commerce,
Wcane Welncneteie EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
5. PSG College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu | Nidhin Donald is an artist and a doctoral scholar
6. Rani Birla Girls' College, Kolkata, West Bengal at JNU Delhi. He has worked with Pune University
7. St. Joseph’s College, Bangaluru, Karnataka and National Campaign on Dalit Human Rights
8. Jyoti Nivas College, Bangaluru, Karnataka (NCDHR). His artwork has regularly featured on
Round Table India. He has completed his
Information on Institute rankings is available at - undergraduate and post graduate program in
hifps://www.nirlindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking. html Sociology and then pursues M.Phil. and PhD from
School of Social Sciences, JNU, Delhi.”
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) Source - https;//www.hss.litb.ac.in/en/post-
doctrol-fellow/nidhin-donald
‘The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains
850

A Space Scientist studies the properties of outer space, including our solar system and other galaxies and solar sys-
tems, by analyzing data collected by equipment mounted on orbiters, satellites and other probes that are sent into
space.
Se | )
a)
Y y G,

« National Scholarship Portal - Visit

www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there

are Central Government Schemes offered by

different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and

State Schemes*

INSPIRE Fellowship- Visit

https://www.online-inspire.gov.in/ scholarship is =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY

provided by the Department of Science & AO) vecccccccscsscteeeceeeneaseesens

Technology. 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream

Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)- (Physics, Chemistry and Maths) ;

Visit https://www.pmrf.in/ for research in STEM 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Sc.) in

fields. Physics/Mathematics

OR
1. Complete a Bachelor's degree in science.
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes 2. Master's degree (M.Sc.)
based on merit’ 3. Ph.D. in Astronomy and Astrophysics/ Applied
Mathematics.

*(Availability of these scholarships can vary from

time to time)

« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a

portal for students seeking education loan. This

portal has been developed under the guidance of

the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of

Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks

Association (IBA).

« Some states have student credit cards with low o-

interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, _

Bihar, etc. rrr

« All banks give education loans.

851

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?

Places of Work: Public and Private Research and EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7"

Observatories. ; .
Junior Researcher — Space Scientist >

Work Environment: You have to work for at least 8 to Head of Department

9 hours and for 5 to 6 days a week. Shift duties may

be there. Overtime is common.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

The course is offered by the Department of Mathematics/Astrophysics.

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Indian Institute of Science,Bengaluru, Karnataka

2. National Institute of Technology, Rourkela,Odisha

3. Osmania University, Hyderabad, Telangana

4. Punjabi University, Patiala, Punjab

5. Indian Institute of Technology, Indore, Madhya Pradesh

6. Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai, Maharashtra

7. St Xavier's College, Ahmedabad, Gujarat

8. Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC before applying)

1. Loyola College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

2. Mar lvanios College, Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala

3. St Joseph's College, Bengaluru, Karnataka

4. PSG College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore, Odisha EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66

5. KJ Somaiya College of Science and Commerce, ; ; ; .

“inbet. Melercehize Anuradha T.K. is a retired Indian scientist and

6. Dr DY Patil Arts Commerce and Science College, project director of the Indian Space Research

aun, Mslereetnnal Organisation (ISRO). She has worked on the

7.St Thomas College, Thrissur, Kerala launches of the satellites GSAT-12 and GSAT-10.

8. St Teresa's College, Ernakulam “dexelley She is the senior most female scientist at ISRO,

‘ ‘ having joined the space agency in 1982, and

Information on the institute rankings can be found also the first woman to become a satellite proj-

at - hitps;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html ect director at ISRO. Born in Bengaluru, she
graduated with a bachelor's degree in electron-

DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE ics from the University Visvesvaraya College of

Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) Engineering in Bangalore."
Source - indiatimes.com/trending/rocket-
women-isro-scientists-india-56 1515.html?
picid=2243362
‘The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains

852

A Statistician gathers numerical data and then analyzes and interprets them, helping companies to make sense of quantita-
tive data. The companies, in turn, use this information to spot trends and make predictions.
oj
yy | COR
e_ '
¢ National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
INSPIRE Fellowship- Visit
https://www.online-inspire.gov.in/ scholarship is
provided by the Department of Science & =
Technology, [EG EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)- 1. Complete 10+2 with Economics
Visit https://www.pmrf.in/ for research in STEM 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Sc) in
fields. Statistics/Mathematics or any related subject
OR
: ; ; 1 Complete a Bachelor's degree.
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes 2. Master's degree in Statistics
pre oxel Ch inked 3. Ph.D in Statistics/Math
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
time to time)
« VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a io"
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc. o
- All banks give education loans. tee eee
853

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Banking and Financial Organizations, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH 7"
and Insurance Companies
Statistician — Statistician, Applied >
Work Environment: It is a desk job. You need not Operation Research Analyst
handle a team. Local travel may be a part of this job
role. Organizations usually work for 5 to 6 days a
week for 10 to 12 hours every day. This may vary from
organization to organization. Shift system may be
available. Overtime may be required
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Statistics.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh
2. Acharya Nagarjuna University, Guntur, Andhra Pradesh
3. Annamalai University, Chidambaram, Tamil Nadu
4. Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Marathwada University,
Aurangabad, Maharashtra
5. Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh
6. Bangalore University, Bengaluru, Karnataka
7. Berhampur University, Berhampur, Odisha
8. University of Burdwan , Raiganj, West Bengal
9. Any recognised University in India
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if the institute is affiliated and accredited
with UGC before applying)
a EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD [J
1. Loyola College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
2. Silver Oak University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat Madhumita Ghosh-Dastidar is the head of
3. St Joseph's College,Bengaluru, Karnataka Statistics Group and a senior statistician at the
4. PSG College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore, Odisha RAND Corporation, the US-based think-tank.
5.KJ Somaiya College of Science and Commerce, She Is a fellow of the American Statistical
Mumbai,Maharashtra Association (ASA), and was a statistician for two
6. Dr. DY Patil Arts Commerce and Science College, studies receiving the RAND President's Choice
Pune, Maharashtra Award in 2014 and 2015. Ghosh-Dastidar
7. Himalayan School of Science and Technology, received her Ph.D. and M.A. in Statistics from
Swami Rama Himalayan University, Dehradun, Uttarakhand Pennsylvania State University and her BS in
8. St. Teresa's College, Ernakulam, Kerala Mathematics and Computer Science from
Albright College.”
Information on the institute rankings can be found
at - https://www.nirfindia.org/Rankings/2023/Ranking.html! Source:
https;//www.rand.org/about/people/g/ghosh-
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE dastidar_bonnie.html
Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU)
854 “The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains

Toxicology is a field of Science that helps understand the harmful effects that chemicals, substances, or
situations, can have on people, animals, and the environment. Some refer to toxicology as the “Science of Safety”
because as a field it has evolved from a Science focused on studying poisons and adverse effects of chemical expo-
sures, to a one devoted to studying safety. An expert in this field is called a toxicologist.
Ls j
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes*
INSPIRE Fellowship- Visit
https://www.online-inspire.gov.in/ scholarship is =
provided by the Department of Science & ES EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY =
Technology. : ;
1. Complete 10 + 2 in Science stream
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)-
Visit https://www.pmrft.in/ for research in STEM 2. Complete a Bachelor's (BSc) degree in
fields. Botany/Chemistry/Zoology/Biochemistry or any
related subject.
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes 3. Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
sesoel Om Met Master's degree in Toxicology or related Subject.
4. PhD. in related subject
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Please check the duration of th uri ment
time to time) 10n Oo € course auring enroimen
- VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Ga
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
- Some states have student credit cards with low oe
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha, _
Bihar, etc. oe
« All banks give education loans. coe re ee ee ee ees
855

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?

Places of Work: Government and Private Hospitals,

Medical Colleges, Government and Industrial

Laboratories etc. EXPECTED GROWTH PATH f7

Entrepreneurship: You can set up your own laboratory. Intern me Junior Doctor — Toxicologist
— Senior Toxicologist > Head of

Work Environment: It is a desk job. You will need to Department

handle a team of nurses and other medical staff. Local

travel may be part of the job. Part-time work and

contractual jobs are available. Hospitals and clinics

usually work for 6 to 7 days. You are likely to work 9 to 10

hours 6 days a week. This may vary from clinic to clinic.

Shift system may be available.

Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field

WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?

The course is offered by the Department of Toxicology.

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh

2. King’s George Medical University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh

3. Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh

4. Maulana Azad Medical College, New Delhi

5. Government Medical College and Hospital, Chandigarh

6. Kolkata Medical College, Kolkata, West Bengal

7. Osmania Medical College, Hyderabad, Telangana

PRIVATE INSTITUTES

(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC before applying)

1. Christian Medical College, Vellore, Tamil Nadu

2. Kasturba Medical College , Manipal, Karnataka

3. Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical

Education and Research, Puducherry EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
4. Sri Ramachandra Institute of Higher Education and
Research, Chennai, Tamil Nadu Dr. P. Sampath Kumar is a Toxicologist, Legal

5. St. John's Medical College, Bangalore, Karnataka Medicine and Medical Expertise Specialist who

6. JSS Medical College, Mysore, Karnataka practices in Chennai. He has 39 Yects of experi-

7. Siksha ‘O’ Anusandhan University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha ence in the fields. Kumar completed his MBBS

8. Shri Rameswary Memorial University, Chennai, and MD in Forensic Medicine & Toxicology from

Tamil Nadu from Madras Medical College, Chennai. He is a
member of the Tamil Nadu Medical Council.

Information on the institute rankings can be found ;

at - https;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html Source: https///www.practo.com/chennal/
doctor/dr-p-sampath-kumar-toxicologist
*The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains

856

Virologists study viruses and how they affect humans, animals, insects, bacteria, fungi and plants, in
community, clinical, agricultural and natural environments.
7) \ | /
O
\
- National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes*
INSPIRE Fellowship- Visit
https://www.online-inspire.gov.in/ scholarship is =! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
provided by the Department of Science & SD enessecsessessseneceeseesscuessesecacnsenestenecueseesecncenseseseeneens
Technology. 1. Complete 10+2 in Science stream (Physics,
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)- Chemistry and Biology)
Visit https://www.pmrf.in/ for research in STEM 2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Sc.) in
fields. Microbiology/Virology/Life Science/
Biochemistry/Biotechnology/Zoology/
Medical lab technology or any allied subject
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes OR
based on merit’ Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
Master's degree in the same or allied field
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
time to time)
- VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a Ga
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
+ Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc. :
« All banks give education loans. Lee ee ee ee eee
i  .._.w

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Hospitals, Health Departments, EXPECTED GROWTH PATH f/
Universities , Research agencies
Research Fellow — Virologist — Senior
Work Envionment: It is a desk job. You may need to Virologist + Head of Department,
handle a team of laboratory workers and helpers. Local Virology
travel is not a part of this job role. Part-time work and
contractual jobs may be available. You are likely to have
regular work hours. Organizations usually work for 5 to 6
days a week and 9 to 10 hours every day. This may vary
from organization to organization. Shift system may be
available.
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Microbiology/Virology/
Life Science/Biochemistry/Biotechnology/Zoology
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi
2. Jawaharlal Institute of Postgraduate Medical Education and Research, Puducherry
3. King George's Medical University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
4. Annamalai University, Chidambaram, Tamil Nadu
5. Uttar Pradesh University of Medical Sciences, Saifai, Uttar Pradesh
6. Chhatrapati Shahu ji Maharaj University, Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh
7. All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Rishikesh, Uttarakhand
8. Sher-I-Kashmir Institute of Medical Sciences, Srinagar, Jammu & Kashmir
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC or MCI before applying)
]. Shree Guru Gobind Singh Tricentenary University,
Gurugram, Uttar Pradesh
2. Manipal Academy of Higher Education, Manipal, Karnataka EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
3. Krishna Institute of Medical Sciences, Malkapur, Dr. Gangandeep Kang, an Indian Virologist, is
Maharashtra ; . hailed as the 'vaccine godmother' of India. She
4. Dayananda Sagar University, Bangalore, Karnataka has been a leading researcher in viral infections
5. Singhania University, Jhunjhunu, Rajasthan in children and has worked on public health and
© AAI) Maiertiiy, Metals Uttar Pradesh diarrhoea diseases since the 1990s in India. She
7. Adamas University, Kolkata, West Bengal is the first Indian woman to be elected as Fellow
8. Parul University, Vadodara, Gujarat of the Royal Society, London. She has worked
. , . extensively in the rotavirus research and was a
Information on the institute rankings can be found key scientist in developing the vaccine for
at - httos;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking. html! diarrhoea, Rotovac from Bharat Biotech
International.”
Source - https;//www.cmch-vellore.edu/SingleP-
age.aspx?pid=P 1608020098 mid=
M190619168
858 ‘The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains

A Zoologist is a scientist who studies animals. Zoologists are experts on everything about animals — from their cells to
the history of their evolution. They typically research animals and their natural habitat in zoos where they are kept in
captivity. Zoologists try to enhance the understanding about the lives of animals by studying their behaviour.
@s.
« National Scholarship Portal - Visit
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there
are Central Government Schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes and
State Schemes”
INSPIRE Fellowship- Visit
https://www.online-inspire.gov.in/ scholarship is
provided by the Department of Science &
Technology.
=! EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
Prime Minister's Research Fellowship (PMRF)- © vreresssssssesssssseesssssnecssssessesesecesssesecsssnesssnsecassnaanseaee
Visit https://www.pmrf.in/ for research in STEM 1. Complete 10+2 in the Science stream (Physics,
fields. Chemistry and Biology)
2. Complete a Bachelor's degree (B.Sc.) in
« Scholarships are also available in the Institutes Zoology
based on merit” OR
Complete a Bachelor's degree followed by a
Master's degree in the same or allied field
‘(Availability of these scholarships can vary from
time to time) Please check the duration of the course during enrolment
- VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, \s a Ga
portal for students seeking education loan. This
portal has been developed under the guidance of
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks
Association (IBA).
« Some states have student credit cards with low
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
+ All banks give education loans.
Dee ee ee 859

WHERE WILL YOU WORK?
Places of Work: Zoos, Laboratories, Government EXPECTED GROWTH PATH ~/
Research Centres among others
Zookeeper — Assistant Zoologist >
Work Environment: It is not a desk job. You will supervise Zoologist > Senior Zoologist, Head of
a team of assistant zoologists and other staff. Local travel Department — Chief Zoologist
may be a part of the job role. Part-time work and
contractual jobs may be available. Organizations usually
work 6 to 7 days a week and 8 to 10 hours every day.
This may vary from organization to organization. Shift
system may be available
Opportunities for work exist for differently abled in this field
WHERE WILL YOU STUDY?
This course is offered by the Department of Zoology.
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda,
Vadodara, Gujarat
2. Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh
3. University of New Delhi
A. Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune, Maharashtra
5. Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh
6. Annamalai University, Chidambaram, Tamil Nadu
7. Gujarat University, Gujarat, Ahmedabad
8. Visva Bharati University, Sriniketan, West Bengal
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if Institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC
and AICTE before applying)
]. Christ University, Bangalore, Karnataka
2. Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi
3. National Institute of Medical Sciences , Jaipur, Rajasthan EXAMPLE FROM THE FIELD 66
A. Jain University, Bangalore, Karnataka : .
5. Chandramohan Jha University, Shillong, Meghalaya Mukund Lal Bhatia was an expert in Zoology and
6. CT University, Ludhiana, Punjab Entomology. He was affiliated with the University of
7, Bhagwant University Aimer Rejssthen Delhi and was the Honorary Professor at Biosci-
8. University of Technology Jaipur Rajasthan ences Department of Himachal Pradesh University.
9. Mahatma Jyoti Rao Phoole University, Jaipur, Rajasthan Bhatia studied Morphology and Functional Mor-
10. RKDF University, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh phology of Indian and Foreign Leeches for his aca-
’ ‘ demic and research career.”
Information on the institute rankings can be found at -
httos;//www.nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html SEU o lnilehsy// eatin celveieleony les
come-a-zoologist-in-india-famous-
DISTANCE LEARNING INSTITUTE OMNIS LEU SI AIM fee
Indira Gandhi National Open Plea) (IGNOU) “The above information is for training purposes only and will not
be used for any commercial gains
860

5 ae W
a FP Ye

Se i] =

a ir Ln. i
Technical and s
Skill Trades i B
~ ww le
Sy Fal

=

sh Gy) a

x 4 op
Bk

be Be
a FP oS
Sl - F
£'g 2,
ia
o (NS
LY bel’
sh &) a
ml &
W- O@

——
« You have an artistic bent of mind
« You can concentrate and work for long hours
« Your eye-to-hand coordination is good
The approx. course fee ranges between
INR 20,000 — 50,000*
“These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute to
Institute.
Minimum Qualification
After completion of class 10 and with at least 2-year
relevant experience you can enrol for National Skill
Qualification Framework (NSQF)* Level 4 course for
Appliqué Artisan course.
OR
After completion of class 10 and pursuing continuous
schooling you can enrol for National Skill Qualification
Framework (NSQF)* Level 4 course for Appliqué Artisan
course.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
“The figures are indicative & subject to change
¢ The approx. salary of an Applique Artisan
fresher ranges between INR 8,751 -
21,193* per month.
¢ The approx. salary of an Applique Artisan
after 5 years of service ranges between
INR 11,834 - 38,109* per month.
Source: htips://paycheck.in/career-tips/ oe
role-income/india-sewing-embroidery- se
and-related-workers _
863

Trainee Appliqué Designer > Appliqué
Designer > Supervisor Appliqué
Designer
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. National Institute of Fashion Technology, New Delhi
2. National Institute of Design, Anmedabad, Gujarat
3. Indian Institute of Crafts and Design, Jaipur, Rajasthan
4. Kalakshetra Foundation, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
5. Shantiniketan, Visva Bharati University, Santiniketan, West Bengal
6. Srishti Institute of Art, Design, and Technology, Bengaluru, Karnataka
7. Pearl Academy, New Delhi
8. Istituto Marangoni, Mumbai, Maharashtra
9. MIT Institute of Design, Pune, Maharashtra
10. JD Institute of Fashion Technology, New Delhi
Ms. Kalpana Maharana, a resident of
Brundabanpur Gram Panchayat of Ranpur Block,
Nayagarh district, is one such artisan who has
established a successful Appliqué works venture
with the support of Odisha Livelihood Mission
(OLM). On an average, she earns about Rs 11,000
to Rs 15,000 on a monthly basis by selling her
products. This is a reality today due to the financial
support she secured through Start-Up Village
Entrepreneurship Program (SVEP).at a minimum
interest rate. In the beginning, Kalpana was
granted a loan of Rs 50,000 under the SVEP. After
the successful repayment of the loan, she received
Rs 60,000 from the Community Investment Fund
(CIF) through the Brundaban Gram Panchayat
Level Federation (GPLF). This helped her to employ
more women in her business.”
Source: https;//rural.nic.in/sites/default/files/
NRLM_75_Stories_of_Atmanirbhar_ 1709202 1
pdf
“The above information is for training purposes only and will not
be used for any commercial gains.
864

An Assistant Beauty Therapist is expected to know the basics of beauty therapy,
health and hygiene. They provide various beauty services such as manicure, . J
pedicure, facials and other required services. They also assist in the upkeep of the _- a ¢
salon and other tasks including upkeep of things used, cleaning the salon, preparing ~h f-
items needed for treatment, check for available stocks. y La di
» S|
a = = "
Bar ( @
PERSONALITY TRAITS ®. [>
« You have an eye for personal grooming n
« You have an artistic, creative bent of mind
+ You are an effective communicator 7
» You have a friendly, approachable personality S & aA yr,
| = | COURSE FEE
Y
The approx. course fee ranges between
ee INR 20,000 - 50,000°
» National Scholarship Portal - Visit “These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute to
www.scholarships.gov.in. Under this portal there Institute.
are Central Government schemes offered by
different departments, UGC/AICTE Schemes
etal HELO SENSU [=}, EDUCATIONAL PATHWAY
¢ Scholarships are also available in the institutes sreeeeeeseeeeesoceeeceecceeees
based on merit’. Minimum Qualification
“(Availability of these scholarships can vary from » After completion of Class 8 and minimum age is
Ue Ye tn} 14 for enrolling in National Skill Qualification
LOANS Framework Level 3 course for Assistant Beauty
Therapist
+ VidyaLakshmi, www.vidyalakshmi.co.in, is a OR
portal for students seeking education loan. This ;
portal has been developed under the quidance of + After completion of Class 10 you may enrol for
the Department of Financial Services, (Ministry of NSQF Level 3 course for Assistant Beauty
Finance), Ministry of Education and Indian Banks Therapist.
Association (IBA).
- Some states have student credit cards with low Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
interest rates, for instance, West Bengal, Odisha,
Bihar, etc.
« All banks give education loans.
oe" EXPECTED INCOME
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of an Assistant Beauty
Therapist fresher ranges between
INR 8,000 - 10,000* per month.
The approx. salary of an Assistant Beauty
Therapist with 2-3 years of experience ranges
between INR 15,000 — 20,000* per month.
Source: https;//bit ly/3XMcpZG .
e e e e e e e e e e 865.

Assistant Beauty Therapist — Beautician >
Senior Beautician — Head Beautician
OR
Assistant Beauty Therapist —
Beautician — Senior Beautician + Open
own business
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. Industrial Training Institute (ITI), Mumbai, Maharashtra
2. National Skill Training Institute (NSTI), Kolkata, West Bengal
3. Government Women's Polytechnic College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu
4. State Institute of Beauty and Spa Therapy, Bangalore, Karnataka
PRIVATE INSTITUTES
(Please check if institute is affiliated and accredited with UGC and AICTE before applying)
1. VLCC Institute (Multiple Location) Sunita Rani came to know about the Skill India
2. Shahnaz Husain International Beauty Academy, New Delhi Mission and the various training programs under
3. Lakmé Academy (Multiple Location) the initiative. She understood the components of
the beauty therapist training, gained information
Information on the institute rankings can be found at - about the beauty sector, potential job profiles in
www. nirfindia.org/2023/Ranking.html the sector, scope and entrepreneurial idea of
self-contracting among other factors. Assuring
herself and her family, she enrolled herself for the
= three-month course where she became proficient
ye at her skills and sartorial knowledge. Additionally,
A she also learnt how to converse in Basic English,
operate computers, and present herself in front of
others. After completing the course, she was
> running her own Parlour with the name of Herbal
C Beauty Zone and earning more than Rs. 30000.
She has been working effectively and happily in
her new life and always thanks skill India mission
which makes her capable to earn this life style.”
Source: https;//graminskill.com/Overview
_Student.aspx?cid=4030&&id=5037
i “The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains.
866

| >
x Ay
0 ¢ «
WY] aot
Ba VS
bas VA
¢ You are physically fit ! 7m
« You like to have clear instructions to follow "a
¢ You pay attention to details while working a =
\! \
l "
mh i 8
The approx. course fee ranges between
INR 10,000 - 50,000*
“These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute to
Institute.
Minimum Qualification
« After completing class 8 and being 18 years of
age you can enrol for National Skills Qualification
Framework (NSOF)" level 3 Assistant Carpenter -
Wooden furniture training.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
“The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of an Assistant Carpenter -
Wooden furniture ranges between INR 20,000
- 35,000°* per month.
Source: https;//in.indeed.com/q-furniture-car-
penter-jobs.html?vjk=f0e0d5aa4 | 2baf29 :
ey

Helper — Assistant Carpenter - Wooden
furniture + Carpenter - Wooden Furniture

The course is offered by the different Departments.

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Government Industrial Training Institute (ITI), Mumbai, Maharashtra

2. Government Polytechnic College, Chennai, Tamil Nadu

3. Government Tool Room &Training Centre (GTTC), Bengaluru, Karnataka

4. National Institute of Design (NID), Anmedabad, Gujarat

5. Central Institute of Hand Tools (CIHT), Jalandhar, Punjab
Priti, as a young girl would watch closely and learn
from her father. She was very interested in
carpentry and learned everything just by watching
him, making her first cupboard at the age of 20,
which she also managed to sell. Priti started her
first workshop in 2014 and was the only female
assistant carpenter there. Trained in business
development under the Skill India mission, she now
dreams of opening a large showroom someday.
Today, Priti is applying the skills she learnt, with her
business steadily growing. Priti gets very annoyed
at the gender discrimination still rampant at her
workplace and is of the opinion that everyone is
capable of any work. She also considers no work
as too big or too small. To succeed, one should just
follow their dreams and keep at it by working
hard.”
Source: https://yourstory.com/socialsto-

‘ ry/2022/04/woman-successful-en-
trepreneur-village-monday-motivation
*The above information is for training purposes only and will
868 ( not be used for any commercial gains.

« You are physically fit q
¢ You like to have clear instructions to follow
« You are comfortable working in a team
¢ You are orgnaized in your work i
The approx. course fee ranges between
INR 10,000 - 50,000*
“These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute to
Institute.
Minimum Qualification
« After completing class 8 and being 18 years of
age you can enrol for National Skills Qualification
Framework (NSQF)* level 3 Assistant False
Ceiling and Drywall Installer course.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of an Assistant False
ceiling and drywall Installer ranges between
INR 15,000 — 18,000* per month.
Source: https;//bit.ly/4 1gCHpy :
869

Helper —> Assistant False Ceiling and
Drywall Installer  Chargehand False
Ceiling and Drywall Installer + Senior
Installer + Supervisor — Site Manager
This list of institutes is indicative only
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES
1. ITI's Industrial Training Institute
2. Small Skill Development Ltd.., Thane, Maharashtra
3. Saint Gobain Gyproc Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai, Maharashtra
Ala Singh went to Mayo School of Arts (National
College of Arts, Lahore) in 1883-1884 where he
mastered the art of Plaster of Paris and carpentry
from Bhai Ram Singh and Sir Ganga Ram, the
veterans of the Sikh architectural school of
thought. In 1890, he started working with his
masters and other architects. Ala Singh assisted in
the design of Imperial Forest Research Institute,
Dehradun, ceiling plastering and woodwork at
Indian Military Academy, Lalgarh Palace, Lakshmi
Niwas Palace, Gajner palace, and Bejoy Bhawan
(Veterinary University). A century later, his
grandson Swaranjit Singh found some testimonials
to his brilliance from his old house near Manna
Singh Chowk in the walled city Amritsar.”
Source: https;//indianexpress.com/article/
cities/chandigarh/s-ala-singh-unknown-craftsman-
mayo-8209607/
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
870 not be used for any commercial gains.

ie Z
ay
Wr
* You like to work in a team re)
* You like to put things together
+ You like to have clear instructions to follow
+» You enjoy repairing all kinds of mechanical objects
The approx. course fee ranges between
INR 10,000 — 50,000*
“These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute to
Institute.
Minimum Qualification
« After passing class 8 with 1 year of relevant
experience you can enroll for a National Skills
Qualification Framework (NSQF)* Level 3 course
for Astt. Fitter: Levelling, Alignment & Balancing.
OR
e After passing class 10 you can enroll for a NSQF
Level 3 course for Asst. Fitter: Levelling,
Alignment & Balancing.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
“The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of an Asst. Fitter ranges
between INR 19,000 - 20,000* per month.
Source: https;//bit. ly/3iy4 1Op
871

Asst. Maintenance Fitter > Maintenance
Fitter > Supervisor Maintenance Fitter

The course is offered by the different Departments.

This list of institutes is indicative only

INSTITUTES

1. National Institute of Technology, (Multiple locations across India)

2. Industrial Training Institutes (ITI’s), (Multiple locations across India)

3. Aptech Aviation and Hospitality Academy, Madhya Pradesh

4. Carrier Air Conditioning and Refrigeration Ltd. (Multiple locations across India)

5. Blue Star Ltd. (Multiple locations across India)
Shri Kilaparthi Niranjan, a son of maid servant
from Vizianagaram, did not get a suitable job after
completing ITI from Vizianagaram. In the
meantime, he got to know about
SDI-Visakhapatnam through his friend and joined
the Fitter Fabrication course. Within 3 months of
completing the training from SDI-Visakhapatnam,
he secured an overseas assignment and is now
working with Adyard, Abu Dhabi, United Arab
Emirates (a leading engineering service provider
company in Oil & Gas Sector), earning a salary of
1700 UAE Dirham per month.”

* _ > Source: htips://www.hsscinalia.in/wp-content
J uploads/20 1 8/12/Succes-Story-of-Trainees-
>| a from-SDIs.pdf
“The above information is for training purposes only and will
872 at Z not be used for any commercial gains.

9
« You have a good communications skills *
« You are physically active
« You have a good hand-to-eye coordination
« You have a systematic approach to doing any work
a
—S_
The approx. course fee ranges between
INR 10,000 - 50,000*
“These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute to
Institute.
Minimum Qualification
After completion of class 8 you can enroll for
National Skills Qualification Framework (NSQF)*
Level 3 course for Assistant Hair Stylist.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
: ‘The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of an Assistant hair stylist
with 3-7 year experience ranges between
INR 16,500 — 26,000* per month.
Source: htips;//in.indeed.com/cmp/Looks-Sa-
lon/salaries/Salon-Assistant oe
tee ee eee 823

Trainee — Asst. Hair Stylist — Senior Hair
Stylist > Hair Stylist, Expert
@
ws
Cc
—_
1 A
The course is offered by the different Departments.
This list of institutes is indicative only
INSTITUTES _ ro)
1. LOréal Professionnel Academy, Bengaluru, Karnataka = —
2. Vidya Institute of Creative Teaching, New Delhi
3. Pearl Academy, New Delhi
4. Kolkata Beauty School, Kolkata, West Bengal ; ;
Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY), a
government programme launched for training
e people in various fields. Under this programme,
Mosaic Work skills Pvt. Ltd. had established a
PMKK centre at Bandipora and are helping people
who have dropped out of school to learn new
skills. On further enquiry, Sameer found out that he
could get trained for the job role of a Hairstylist.
This training has changed his personality, as he
learnt more about interpersonal as well as
i grooming skills during the sessions. He learnt
various hair styling techniques such as haircut,
colouring, styling hair using blow drying and finger
drying techniques, how to work on different lengths
of hair, etc. Today he is earning Rs. 15,000 per
month. Through this training programme, the lives of
his family has improved, and he is now financially
independent and looks forward to a secure future.
(Sameer Ahmed Najar From Bandipora, J&K).”
Source: https;//www.pmkvyofficial.org/
successdetail/6047 1dcée774000096006eef
*The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains.
874
—_—_———_

; 1
J
« You are physically fit
+ You like to have clear instructions to follow
« You are comfortable working in a team
| ;
I
The approx. course fee ranges between
INR 10,000 - 50,000°
“These figures are estimated numbers and will vary from Institute to
Institute.
Minimum Qualification
« After completing class 8 and being 18 years of
age you can enrol for National Skills Qualification
Framework (NSQF)’ level 2 Surveyor course.
Please check the duration of the course during enrolment.
“The figures are indicative & subject to change
The approx. salary of an Assistant Surveyor
ranges between INR 10,000 - 39,000°*
per month.
Source: payscale.com/research/IN/Job
=Land_Surveyor_Assistant/Salary “a
* 875

Assistant surveyor — Lead surveyor

This list of institutes is indicative only

GOVERNMENT INSTITUTES

1. Indian Institute of skill development Traning, Indore, Madhya Pradesh

2. Larsen & Toubro Institute of Project Managment

3. Geo Institute of Technologies, Telangana

4. Geo informatics services technology, Hyderabad, Telangana

yr I
Swadesh Manna used to work as contractual day
a labourer at Birlapur Jute Mill and belonged to a
Rory lower middle class family. In the year 2006-2008
he enrolled for course in “Surveyor”. After the
successful completion of course, he is now
employed as a surveyor in L&T construction with
salary of INR 39,000 per month.”
Source: https;//ititollygunge.in/images/
Sucess_Stories.pdf
*The above information is for training purposes only and will
not be used for any commercial gains.
876

